
# Capital numbers and their obscure numericalities

## Recounting a single large number


What constitutes good counting today? STS work has a long-standing interest in numbers and counting. In light of recent STS debates around the devices, agency and politics of counting, and amidst broader sociological debates about challenges to empirical methods posed by data mining, the acts of counting or numbering things come at a cost.  The forms of counting I explore will focus on problems of copying, duplicating, and imitation that render large numbers a moving substrate. We report on a deliberately naive attempt to count approximately 12 million code repositories on the social media platform Github. 

## Science studies and its interest in numbers

At almost every point in its history, STS has taken an active interest in what numbers do, who they matter to, and how they are made. The extraordinary diversity of numbering practices studied by STS and affiliated fields include measurements, enumerations [@Verran_2001],  calculation [@Callon_2005a], indices, risks and chance, statistics [@Hacking_1990], indices [@Nafus_2014], metrics [@Burrows_2012], model parameters, or even computable numbers [@Mackenzie_1997b], as well as problematic and contested numbers [@Verran_2011; @Lampland_2010; @Miller_2009]. From this rich panoply of work, many lessons concerning the historical, contextual, material and political situatedness of numbers can be drawn. While crucial to our elementary senses of the multiple, numbers and numberings display reef-like growths and irregularities that resist  any attempt to distill their essence in a single mathematical formalism such as set or number theory. STS work has not itself shied away from working with and producing numbers. We need only think of the many metrical enterprises of actor network theorists in their work on co-word analyses of scientific literature [@Callon_1991] or indeed the software that Thomas Kuhn describes in the appendices to  _The Structure of Scientific Revolutions_ [@Kuhn_1996]. Numbers and to a less extent calculation have certainly counted in the development of STS sensibilities around sciences and technologies in and around the world.

## Does STS have calculative agency?

What then is the contemporary agency of STS around numbers? This is a daunting question, since it immediately opens onto the ethical, epistemological, infrastructural and economic entanglements of contemporary data practices [@Gitelman_2013; @Halpern_2015; @Ruppert_2013; @Kitchin_2014], as well as the sometimes costly calculative complexities found in many scientific, governmental and commercial domains. Economists [@Porter_2008], physicists turned social [@Pentland_2014], statisticians [@Desrosieres_2011] or data scientists [@Diggle_2015] have, it seems, exponentially greater calculative agency than STS researchers around numbers.    

If we follow STS's own accounts of numbers, practices of enumeration or calculation, then we might think of working with numbers today as a question of what Michel Callon and Fabian Muniesa call 'calculative agency':
    
>Isolating objects from their context, grouping them in the same frame, establishing original relations between them, classifying them and summing them up are all costly activities that raise the question of calculative power.[@Callon_2005a, 1232].

The three operations of isolating, grouping together, establishing relations, summing up are 'costly' because they need to be configured as a form of agency that draws on tools, devices, goods and services, and multiple expertises (in relation).  Even if a form of calculative agency adheres to STS research, the ways and byways along which calculative STS agents encounter numbers will be diverse. Social media [@Marres_2015], scientific publications [@Leydesdorff_1998; @Latour_2012], scientific databases [@Bowker_2010a], official statistics, web-scraping [@Rogers_2004] present very different, albeit increasingly interwoven assemblies of number. As Callon and Muniesa observe, 'calculative agencies are as numerous and diverse as the tools they use and the hybrid collectives to which those tools belong' [@Callon_2005a, 1245]. If calculative agencies are diverse, then work of summing up will be too.    

## Re-counting a capital number on  a platform

Since mid-2013, we have sought to develop some calculative agency around a single number associated with the code repository/social media platform, Github.com. While the project focused largely on transformations in the social life of code, it also explicitly sought to experiment with data-intensive methods for  analysis of social re-assemblings and re-associations typical of places such as Github.  

Coding practices have changed over the last decade or so in fairly profound ways. The organization of software development has shifted away from massively centralized software development (the kind epitomised by Microsoft or IBM during the latter part of last century [@Campbell-Kelly_2003]) to a much more de-centralized process. The geography of coding still centres on well-established urban centres such as San Francisco and London [@Mackenzie_2016], but by virtue of a much wider distribution of coding tools and skills, occurs in many other places as well. Added to this geography, changes in digital devices and infrastructures, ranging from proliferating mobile devices to mushrooming data centres have widened the agency of coding. Code addresses much of the world. At the same time, the separations between between production, distribution, and use of code have thoroughly blurred. Code flows in much more diverse ways through infrastructures and devices. For instance, 'devops' (development-operations) brings coding directly into the ongoing transformative-maintenance of information infrastructure through continuous deployments, often direct from Github [@Mackenzie_2016b].  Across all of these changes, coding has become a much more *public* activity (see [@Kelty_2008]), and the *publicness of code* has become a major concern for business, government and science, albeit for different reasons (for instance, in scientific work, open data has been accompanied by a rapid proliferation of techniques, resources and tools for publishing code written for scientific purposes.

The social media site Github, started in in 2007, epitomises and has indeed been central -- as the suffix 'hub' suggests -- to these changes. Like many social media platforms,  it has grown tremendously in the last 7 years  to include around 31 million software projects (February 2016). When we started the project in 2013, that number was around 13 million, but each year that number grows greatly.   This growth flows from a tremendous variety of processes that are difficult to summarise or classify partly because the actors, topics or domains of coding are so diverse and partly because much of what flows through Github is both technical and social 'innovative' in the sense that Bruno Latour uses the term when he writes that 'innovative' means that we do not know the number of actors involved in advance [@Latour_1996, 72]. 

Like many contemporary assemblages, Github seeks to describe itself through large numbers, and these numbers in their sometimes daily changes and updates attest to an investment in being innovative or open-ended enumerations.  In June 2014, the Github homepage showed a photo of a women working in an urban office location, with lights and professional camera focused on her work. It described '6.1 million people collaborating right now across 13.2 million repositories ... building amazing things together'. In November 2015, Github has a slightly more functional description, and the image seems to be a press conference in China:

>GitHub is how people build software. With a community of more than 11 million people, developers can discover, use, and contribute to over 29 million projects using a powerful collaborative development workflow. [Github/About](https://github.com/about)

 The numbers change over time alongside the composition of the actors involved (women coding and working at Github, a sore point for the company; Chinese developers using Github, but also political activists, leading to a denial of service attack on the Github, allegedly by the Chinese government [^3]). But the changing numbers, alongside the sometimes rather sublime scales of community (a 'community' of 11 million people?) certainly form part of Github's description.

 [^3]: Neither image -- the woman at work in a funk urban office or the press conference in China -- is arbitrary. Github was rocked in 2012 by allegations of sexism and mismanagement, particularly associated with one of the co-founders, who subsequently resigned and left Github (https://github.com/blog/1823-results-of-the-github-investigation
 ). In early 2015, Github itself was subject to a massive Denial oF Service attack, emanating from China. Reports alleged that the DoS attack targeted pro-democracy repositories on Github. Unlike its regulation of other social media platforms, China does not block Chinese citizens' use of Github because Github is seen as economically and commercially important for the software industry (https://citizenlab.org/2015/04/chinas-great-cannon/). 

How might we treat such numbers? They have a specific texture and consistency as counts of actors associated with platforms, devices and infrastructures. In important ways they are part and parcel of platform politics and business [@Gillespie_2010]. Given the venture capital investments that Github has attracted in the last few years (\$US100 million from Andressen-Horowitz in 2012), these numbers affect flows of capital.  They may be 'false numbers' as Martha Lampland suggests, designed to enable certain forms of rationalization [@Lampland_2010]. They also have the feel of what Carolin Gerlitz and Celia Lury describe in their study of the social reputation website Klout as 'reactive numbers' meant to evoke further work, investment, action and engagement around those numbers [@Gerlitz_2014a].  The numbers 29 million or 13 million are examples of widely used numerical forms: enumerations of entities render Github as an enumerated entity [@Verran_2011, TBA]. While these numbers resemble others -- population statistics for small nations, amounts of money spent on a new building, a research programme or a CEO's remuneration -- they become visible, circulate and are seen in ways that prevent them from being easily assimilated to biopolitical or financial numbers. Their salience and pluri-potence will be described further below, but already they warrant some kind of designation and differentiation. We might call them 'capitalised numbers.'  Capital here has the triple sense of the centre, the capital letter, and the accumulated fund with potential to growth.   A capitalised number enumerates an aggregate, imbues it with importance linked to infrastructural scale and complexity, and promises the potential to generate further accumulation. 

## The litany of sense-making: enumerating the aggregate through events

What is enumerated on Github? The two main enumerations are people and repositories. The people are software developers or codes. Repositories are collections of files mainly containing code, but also a great variety of configuration specific documents (settings, manuals, installation instructions, etc.). Any enumeration of Github contends with not only the sheer number of people visiting and using the platform, but the sheer diversity of ways in which they associate with each other through repositories. It is difficult to say which capital number matters more -- the head count or the repository count. On  Github, both normally appear in tandem: '2,641,337 people hosting over 4,442,708 repositories' announces the Github home page on 27 November 2012 (http://wayback.archive.org/web/20121119020031/http://github.com)[http://wayback.archive.org/web/20121119020031/http://github.com]. While date-linked numbers disappear on more recent versions of the site, the counting continues along a variety of other paths.   

While Github enumerates its own capital numbers on its webpage, those numbers re-play in other setting. Perhaps more importantly, they are re-counted in different ways. Take for instance the data published through the Github API (Application Programmer Interface). APIs  were not created as a data resource for social scientists, but for software developers working in convergence cultures [@Jenkins_2004] in which connecting different platforms, devices, sites and practices together using code has become standard practice. 

In Github's case, data published through the API refers to movements of code, and associative acts connected to coding. The data is generated as developers write code and store that code in repositories. Coding today constructs and take place in increasingly complex associative infrastructures.  Github consistently seeks to code coding as a social network practice. The collaboration or 'sharing' (to use social media keywords) includes both people and things. The format of the data that affords and records this associative structuring collocates people and things.  By convention, for instance, much API data from social media sites has an 'event' structure that links named actors and named entities to specific infrastructural locations (usually coded as an URL) at a particular time (the 'timestamp'). Events on the Github 'events' API (https://api.github.com/events)[https://api.github.com/events] are classified according to one of roughly twenty types. 

```
{
"id": "2111998059",
"type": "WatchEvent",
"actor": {
"id": 1459103,
"login": "mmemetea",
"gravatar_id": "4532d1e4885f579ca7d9aa8748418817",
"url": "https://api.github.com/users/mmemetea",
"avatar_url": "https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/1459103?"
},
"repo": {
"id": 14802742,
"name": "OpenSensorsIO/azondi",
"url": "https://api.github.com/repos/OpenSensorsIO/azondi"
},
"payload": {
"action": "started"
},
"public": true,
"created_at": "2014-05-23T08:40:56Z",
"org": {
"id": 5497318,
"login": "OpenSensorsIO",
"gravatar_id": "1e0218942846ec8ef59f5d679dbca782",
"url": "https://api.github.com/orgs/OpenSensorsIO",
"avatar_url": "https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/5497318?"
}
}
```

The relatively simple  `WatchEvent` on Github shown in Figure 1 documents the act of an `actor` calling themselves `mmemetea` interested in the repository called `azondi`, a software project coordinated by the 'organisation' calling itself `OpenSensorsIO`.[^2]  Note that the event also has various status designations -- it is a `public` event, it has a 'payload' (often much more complicated than simply `started`) -- and includes various indexical references or `id`s that link the event to other groups of people, organisations, repositories and images (`gravatar_id`). The intricate  syntax of this data -- many brackets, inverted commas, colons, commas -- attests to a complex social coordination which aligns actors, actions, places and times in discrete events. The discreteness of such events attests to the potential for the precise configuration of actors around a given repository to change or mutate in some way. New actors might be added; relations might appear between entities; the location of entities might shift, and forms of association ('organizations') might subsume or grow out or around all of this. 

[^2]: In what follows, I use monospace font like `this` when referring to entities named in the Github data. The typography highlights entity subject to enumeration by capital numbers. 

Numbers such as '29 million' or '12 million' capitalize the capillary flow of associations  in and through named entities as repositories and people. They also suggest the possibility of navigating the capillary flow differently. Recent ANT work, such as Latour, Jensen, Venturini et. al's  'The Whole is Smaller than the Part: How Digital Navigation May Modify Social Theory,' argues that given a 'sudden proliferation of digital databases' [@Latour_2012, 18] and tools that allow us to move between different scales and locations in social fields, we no longer need the long-standing structural oppositions between structure and agency, between macro and micro [@Latour_2012]. We instead begin to inhabit a space of continuously transforming scales in which every given standpoint stabilises scales and boundaries of the whole for a particular actor in a perspectival variation. This vision of labile traceability is certainly offered in the  Github data. Does the public availability of data produced and used in associative practices allow us to re-count capital numbers differently? 

## Imbuing numbers with importance

In mid-2012, a 'Web Performance Engineer' at Google called Ilya Grigorik launched a Github repository `igrigorik/githubarchive` linked to a website `GithubArchive.org` dedicated to amalgamating all the Github API event data -- the so-called 'timeline' --  in one place [@Grigorik_2012].  Grigorik, working at Google, had access to Google's infrastructure, and not only published all the data in a cloud-based data store but transformed that data, whose formatting we have discussed above, into the flat tabular forms familiar in much statistical work, and make it available through Google's newly launched cloud computing service, GoogleBigQuery.[^1] The Github timeline data was listed, along with all the words in Shakespeare and all the US birth name records, as one of three dataset exemplars that people could use to learn about GoogleBigQuery. Like the data on GithubArchive itself, the GoogleBigQuery datasets are updated hourly, and they go back to 2011. A database purporting to the whole associative fabric of Github has suddenly appeared. 

[^1]: GoogleBigQuery, it seems, is the commercialisation of an internal infrastructure called `Dremel`, that Google has since 2006 used in many different ways to manage its own platforms. 
    • Analysis of crawled web documents.
    • Tracking install data for applications on Android Market.
    • Crash reporting for Google products.
    • OCR results from Google Books.
    • Spam analysis.
    • Debugging of map tiles on Google Maps.
    • Tablet migrations in managed Bigtable instances.
    • Results of tests run on Google’s distributed build system.
    • Disk I/O statistics for hundreds of thousands of disks.
    • Resource monitoring for jobs run in Google’s data centers.
    • Symbols and dependencies in Google’s codebase. [@Melnik_2010]

The archiving, copying and transformation of Github event data drew the attention many people, including Github itself. A succession of 'Github Data Challenges' ensued in the next three years (2012-2014) The fact Github itself organises 'data challenges' (https://github.com/blog/1544-data-challenge-ii-results) suggests that  people doing things with this data is part and parcel of the public life and publicity of the platform or device. These data challenges are what Anne-Lise Riles calls 'momentary apprehensions of depth' showed that drawing networks has long been part of networks [@Riles_2001, 184]. Whatever the reason for these data challenges (they are increasingly common in many places today in the form of hackathons, data competitions, etc.), they occasion practical re-countings of the data that imbue the capital numbers with greater mobility, value and media or inscriptive form. 

For instance,  the 'OpenSource Report Card' (http://osrc.dfm.io/)  or `dfm/osrc` by Dan Foreman-Mackay, is a prize-winning use of the timeline data. It ingests all the data from the Githubarchive, counting what developers do, when they do it, and using what programming languages. With this data stored, it then builds a predictive model that allows it to both characterise a given Github user, and to predict who that Github user might have affinities with. Here the mass of events in the Github timeline are brought to bear on finding similarities between people. The admonition from Foreman-Mackay  – 'Dear recruiters: While you read this, make sure that you remember that GitHub is not your C.V. and that these stats only provide a biased and one-sided view. This is just a toy. Don't take it too seriously! ' – suggests that even playful application of the data attest to its capitalisation. For coders, programmers and software developers, the profile of their contributions to Github repositories can be part of getting work. 

In response to the Github Data Challenge in 2012, people looked for feelings or 'sentiments' in the timeline data.  Feelings associated with coding were mined by counting emotional words present in comments accompanying the Github events (http://geeksta.net/geeklog/exploring-expressions-emotions-github-commit-messages/). The presence of words in these message can be cross-linked with programming languages in order to profile how different programming languages elicit different emotional reactions. This emphasises how The emphasis how software developers or coders feel in relation to different kinds of work. Certain languages attract exasperation and others pleasure (see [@Coleman_2012] for a broader account of these feelings). For present purposes, the enumeration of affects around code animates the capital numbers of people and repositories with an underpinning reactivity associated with coding in all its vicissitudes [@Gerlitz_2014]. 

The capital number of people associated with Github also begins to acquire a geography through the GithubArchive data. People began to map coders and repositories by geographic location. The  mapping of Github contributions by location performed by David Fischer (http://davidfischer.github.io/gdc2/#languages/All) is typical in that it too counts events, but this time puts the emphasis on the geography of the 'top' repositories, coders and their programming languages. As the David Fischer puts it 'this data set contains contributions to the top 200 GitHub repositories during the first four months of 2013 and plots the location based on what the contributor provided' (http://davidfischer.github.io/gdc2/#languages/All)[http://davidfischer.github.io/gdc2/#languages/All].  

People also make live dashboards for Github. `Octoboard` (http://octoboard.com/) animates changes on Github using the timeline data. It ornaments the capital numbers with a range of peripheral live enumerations that point to the liveliness of events on Github. Like many other dashboards associated with social media analytics, `octoboard` suggests that the constant change in activities Data analysis is no longer something done in leisurely rhythms of analysis, but is increasingly framed as a realtime in the form of 'stream analytics.' That is, not also does the data stream, but the analysis is meant to stream as well in order to be timely, lively and responsive to change. Octoboard presents a summary of daily activity in major categories on Github – how many new repositories, how many issues, how repositories have been 'open sourced' today. It offers realtime analytics on emotions.

Looking slightly more widely,  the Github timeline data has quickly become a favourite training tool for data mining textbooks books that configure and convey the calculative agencies characteristic of capital numbers. In  *Mining the Social Web: Data Mining Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Google+, GitHub, and More,* Matthew Russell makes use of the Github timeline to demonstrate ways of uses social network analysis to highlight the important nodes and links between repositories and users [@Russell_2013]. Again, the propensity to apply network analysis approaches is widespread and endemic to the data itself, given the way that the event format is already implicitly framed by a network or 'social media' understanding. Github's capital numbers, however, become a point of enucleation for calculative agencies [@Callon_2005a, 1245] associated with the calculable goods embodied in code and software. 

For academic researchers in computer science and certain parts of management, Github has been a boon because they study technologically and economically important practices software development in the wild much more easily.  Academic researchers in fields such as software engineering do social network analysis in order to gauge productivity, reuse, efficiency and other engineering and management concern [@Thung_2013]. Like the many Github-hosted projects discussed above, they analyse sentiment [@Guzman_2014], collaboration and productivity [@Dabbish_2012], and geography [@Takhteyev_2010].

The diagramming, counting, measuring and statements generated by the many different treatments of the Github timeline data, particularly although not always in its transformation to a 'big data' queryable dataset on GoogleBigQuery affect the capital numbers that Github enumerates. They enliven, animate, reactivate, localise and qualify those the numbers in ways that highlight the 'natural multiplicity' [@Badiou_2008] of any aggregate. They potentialise the numbers in terms of promissory growth  and further accumulation by summing them up in different ways (realtime, networks of connections, geographies of work and affect), and by exemplifying the emerging forms of calculative agency (social network analysis, machine learning classification and prediction)  associated with the data itself.  

## Acts of infrastructural imitation

These calculative and diagrammatic projects in some ways resonate with an STS-orientation to numbers and enumerations more generally. They often calculatively synthesize diagrams that invite visual navigation identify the ebb and flow of associations. 'It might now be possible to account', write Latour, Jensen et. al 'for longer lasting features of social order by learning to navigate through overlapping ‘monads’ instead of alternating between the two levels of individual and aggregate' [@Latour_2012, 3]. If capital numbers consistently split social order between the aggregates number and individual actors, certainly the data visualizations offer different levels of navigation, sometimes sub-individual ('sentiment') and sometimes supra-individual (links between coders and repositories). All of these calculated diagrammatic enumerations function 'oligoptically': they offer a limited view of a whole [@Latour_2012, 11]. While capital numbers emphasise the whole, STS accounts of the making of views of the whole through enumeration attest to their partial grasp of the whole, to the calculative stabilisation and discretisation of entities in a single frames.    


## The costs of numericality
