The focus of this project has been on how software is made today. We have developed perhaps for the first time some ways of exploring the sheer volume and variety of software devices appearing in contemporary social fields. The key achievements of this work are:

1. By using data analytic techniques, we have begun to develop ways of mapping the relations between and relevance of the millions of software projects found on the code repository platform http://github.com. We have identified significant links between patterns of coding practice, forms of social organisation, and the underlying infrastructures and platforms shape the development of code. We have also begun to show how these links generate flows of imitations, copying and at times contagion around and through software.⋅

2. The research addressed important methodological problems in working with large volumes of data provided by contemporary social media platforms. Using a combination of qualitative and quantitative methods (including machine learning classification techniques), a selection of cutting edge analytic tools (Google BigQuery, and Google Compute)  and working with live datastreams using programming languages (R and Python) to query, transform, aggregate and visualize event-form data, we developed ways of delving more deeply into the sometimes noisy and complex flows of data and events associated with large-scale media and collaborative platforms. We experimented with cutting edge data infrastructures ranging from cloud computing services to machine learning and data-mining techniques in working with our data. Importantly, we addressed some key problems of how to circumvent the limitations or packaging of data produced by the platforms.

3. We developed novel social theoretical constructs  -- such as the concept of the 'field of devices' and the notion of 'metacommunity' -- to help understand the dynamics and processes we see at play around software, media, culture and digital economies. We believe that these constructs will be more widely useful.⋅They draw on existing sociologies of culture, technology, cities and crowds, and combine them with other recent social science accounts of device-specific research. Our work also addresses the need for viable and effective sociological alternatives to the somewhat flattened accounts of social life advanced by social physics and some computational social science.

4. Finally, practically emulating the subjects of our research, we were able to make use of the same practices and infrastructures as the people we were researching -- software developers and other users of code repositories -- to not only present the results of our work, but to document and distribute almost every stage of research work. We have developed a way of versioning the research project, including data analysis, scripts, documents as a 'release' that can be cited (using DOI identifiers) and that will persist through time.
