# Narrative impact

This one year project was focused on exploring and demonstrating the viability of data analytic methodologies for tracking groups, organisations (civic, governmental  and commercial) and devices present in large online code repositories such as Github.com. The project sought to explicitly engage with groups, organisations and devices (platforms, programming languages, software tools, data infrastructures) at a highly aggregate level (on the order of tens of millions of code repositories, and five million programmers and developers). The social and economic impact of this endeavour has not yet connected directly to these organisations, groups and individuals. Although the project's pathways to impact included software developer groups and communities, we did not manage to engage with them directly within the time frame funded by the grant. 

We did, however, engage with the other related organisations during the course of the research in several ways. The main beneficiary of this work was, somewhat unexpectedly, Google Corporation. We made such extensive use of one data analytic tool -- BigQuery -- that the Google Cloud Platform Development team based in California contacted us directly to discuss our use of it. This led to a 90 minute Skype interview with Stefano Menti, a team manager at Google. This discussion, which Menti recorded, was largely focused on the ways in which cloud computing services (databases and compute capacity) could become more usable.  At Menti's request, we also wrote a blog post for the Google Developer's blog describing our experience, but this blog post was not published. Although unlikely to be directly attributable to our conversation, soon afterwards, Google greatly reduced the cost of using BigQuery. 

At the end of the project, we wrote a discussion paper for circulation through Google and other interested parties. This paper described our experience and some of the difficulties in working with large online datasets using cloud-based analytics tools. The paper was discussed at a workshop held in Google London, January 2014, with Google UK employees and other academic participants. The discussion paper is available at the ['metacommunities' Github repository](https://github.com/metacommunities/metacommunities/blob/master/publications/esrc_working_paper_dec2014/mackenzie_google_metacommunities.pdf) 


