# Combinatorial infrastructures: from compiling to continuous building

# 'Dev-ops' and continuous building: when making infrastructures becomes operating infrastructures 

Adrian Mackenzie, Sociology, Lancaster, a.mackenzie@lancaster.ac.uk

## ideas

- is assemblage thinking addressing what is happening today?
- who or what is infrastructure: lots of people or organisations call themselves infrastructure (the query here)
- github is like a small, high-tech island -- a Singapore or a Lagos of the internet -- tremendous amounts of sophisticated affluence surrounded by a morain of service, administrative, maintenance and individual projects (something like the night markets in Singapore as a trace of former panoply)
- infrastructures as superimposed global, like a global variable (Ong & Collier) -- become an important referent -- but actual practices that cannot simply refer to a static global variable. 
- the commit, diff, push and pull, clone and fork operations that define the writing of code might also be images of the actual assemblages that we encounter -- increasingly infrastructures are written; 
- snowden revelations about nsa suggest a kind of combinatorial generation of infrastructures, in which systems, machines, etc are stacked on top of each other
- data centres and their management as a critical infrastructure in multiple ways -- security, business, but access and participation -- but also in the way that they have generated new circuits of infrastructural work that tends to combinatorial contagions. 
- devops as a symptom of the change in the nature of infrastructres in that repair and maintenance are impossible to separate from experimentation and innovation (cf Google article on their experimental approach)
- github itself as an infra-infrastructure that seeks to cope with what people do -- can only use recursion to do this
- infrastructures as attempts to organise the field of participation and to organise social relations in global assemblages
- infrastructures are sense-making processes (with the double play on sense -- direction and perception)

We know that infrastructures are written or inscribed all the way down, or almost all the way down. That is, contemporary infrastructures, especially those affected by information technology (I promise to use that term only once) are generated, configured and maintained by reading and writing things. Given that in many settings, the so-affected infrastructures are the actual norm, the process of reading and writing infrastructures matters greatly in the form of software. This is not to say that water, sanitation, energy, transport, communication, waste and environmental control infrastructures -- the so-called 'hard' infrastructures -- are actually 'soft', in the sense of software. One could say just the opposite and point out that the so-called 'soft' infrastructures of  police, government, justice, the military, education, health, or science -- are not thoroughly material. 

        Recently released NSA documents revealed the existence of FOXSCORE, a massive database that bugs traffic from major internet exchanges. General Keith Alexander, Director of the National Security Agency, assured the public that the program is rubber stamped by a secret court. (http://divergentdave.github.io/nsa-o-matic/)

The NSA-o-matic is a very small piece of code that generates names of potential US NSA (National Security Agency) infrastructures. We know from the files released by Edward Snowden something of the existence of sprawling cyber-security infrastructures such as XKEY, TREASUREMPA, and so forth. One of the problems in making sense of contemporary communication infrastructures is the sheer variety of channels, modalities, platforms, scales of operation and levels of infrastructural interdependency. The Snowden revelations, in all their confusing variety, attest to a kind of combinatorial exuberance in generating new ways of interacting with infrastructures. The NSA-O-Matic plays on this combinatorial process to generate the names of possible NSA infrastructures. Note, as the sample output shown above indicates, FOXSCORE is a database that records things about 'traffic.' Recording, tracking and mapping are responses to the existence of infrastructural processes.  Note too that the existence of fictive entities such as FOXSCORE have started to become social and cultural problems. The humour of the NSA-O-Mat derives partly from the disparity between the claim to pervasive surveillance or interrogation of billions of mundane transactions and conversations, the democratically-mandated authority of government figures such as General Keith Alexander or Senator Dianne Feinstein, and the perfunctory and weak oversight associated with the public assurance. The hard infrastructure of communication and the soft infrastructure of justice or government seem to associate very unstably here.

This situation is not unique to the NSA or government intelligence agencies of a similar ilk. It points to a more general situation or to a problem that elicits many different responses, on various scales across diverse cultural and social spheres. There is no single logic to the combinatorial exuberance at work in contemporary communication infrastructures, since it is the product of multiple determinations. We might look at the sheer abundance of 'apps,' relatively small pieces of software that connect mobile devices like phones into global-scale computing and communication infrastructures as another site of the combinatorial exuberance.
[HERE]

    Recently released NSA documents revealed the existence of WAGONWIND, a USB hardware host tap that deanonymizes communications satellites. An anonymous administration source assured the public that the program would only be used in the event of a national emergency. 

While strenuous and important efforts are being made to map the connections between the NSA's infrastructures and the communications and computing infrastructures that many of us use daily, it might be worth staying close to the practices that generate the combinations that NSA-O-Mat amusingly generates. 

This contribution will principally explore how we might think about infrastructures as cultural processes. It will do this by describing how certain infrastructures are increasingly made as and through software or code. It approaches software less in terms of digital media or control system, and more in terms of software as a permeable material threaded through many different media, communication, administrative and operational infrastructures. The conceptual genealogies I draw on include science and technology studies accounts of information and scientific data infrastructures [@Bowker_2005; @Edwards_2011], as well as anthropological accounts of software in terms of recursion and freedom [@Kelty_2008; @Coleman_2013].

The specific infrastructures I plan to discuss are the code repository platform Github.com with its millions of software repositories sprawling across many domains. The infrastructural dimensions of Github will be empirically specified in terms of the bodies of code that Gibhub's own software developers create and modify as they operate Github as a platform. Put more technically, the empirical focus is on the role of 'dev-ops' or developing-operating as a way of continuously re-fashioning infrastructures through continuous deployment. The increasing elision of any difference between making and operating is a striking feature of such infrastructures, and one that may affect the mode of existence of infrastructures more generally. The entry will explore how different infrastructural figures such as 'the platform,' 'the stack,' 'deployment' and 'build' intersect with various organisational, aesthetic, ethical and commercial regimes of engagement. A  combination of different materials ranging from images, texts, cloud or distributed computing services, various database and search engines, through to code repositories with their groups of contributors comprise the loose but interwoven infrastructures typical of such platforms.  They are hold together, I will suggest, in relational patterns that arise from recursive practice. The striking feature of platforms for software development is how much software development they attract in their own right. This recursive generation of patterned combinations, however, could be understood formally, but I will develop an account of the recursive practices that suggests how they occur when the line between making and operating infrastructures becomes unstable.  
