Adrian Mackenzie (Professor in Technological Cultures, Department of Sociology, Lancaster University, ) has published work on technology: Transductions : bodies and machines at speed, (2002/6); Cutting code: software and sociality (2006), and Wirelessness:  Radical Empiricis m in Network Cultures (2010). He is currently working on the circulation of data intensive methods across science, government, and business in network media. He co-directs the Centre for Science Studies, Lancaster University, UK.

Matthew Fuller’s books include 'Media Ecologies, materialist energies in art and technoculture', (MIT) 'Behind the Blip, essays on the culture of software' and ‘Elephant & Castle’. (both Autonomedia) and with Andrew Goffey, ‘Evil Media’. (MIT)  Editor of 'Software Studies, a lexicon', (MIT) and co-editor of the journal Computational Culture, he is involved in a number of projects in art, media and software.  He is Professor of Cultural Studies and Director of the Centre for Cultural Studies, Goldsmiths, University of London.

Andrew Goffey, Associate Professor, Faculty of Arts, University of Nottingham, researches micropolitics of contemporary software culture and the work of Félix Guattari. He has several collaborative projects that explore the role of digital technology and associated practices on other areas of social and cultural life. These include a project looking at the ''information revolution' in the NHS, a project looking at the globalisation of the mundane aesthetics of the creative and cultural industries, and an ESRC-funded project on the digital commons.
Richard Mills is a computational social scientist currently working in the Psychometrics Centre at the University of Cambridge on an FP7 project (Wikirate - Crowdsource better companies). Richard completed his PhD in Applied Social Statistics in 2013 with a thesis that concerned distributed moderation voting systems as used by websites like Reddit and Stackoverflow. Previously, he studied Psychology and conducted research on face recognition and spatial-numerical cognition.

Stuart Sharples is a lecturer in the Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Lancaster University. His work focuses on statistical modelling in the broader frame of data science. 

