/home/mackenza/notes/barry_2001.md|9 col 223| A second kind of space established by scientific and technological development is what Arjun Appadurai has called technoscapes and I have called technological zones of circulation.  These are spaces formed when  technical devices, practices, artefacts and experimental materials are made more or less comparable or connectable. They therefore link together different sites of scientific and technical practice. Such zones take different forms. The points of access to the zones may be more or less clearly marked, with more or less well-defined and functioning gateways. (202-3)
/home/mackenza/notes/barry_2001.md|12 col 140| [S]cientific practices can become political in so far as they raise questions about the properties and capacities of technical objects and devices. ... In general, the work of testing and demonstrating has anti-political effects. It is intended precisely to contain the potential space of contestation of the properties of new technologies within institutional and discursive limits. (209)
/home/mackenza/notes/barry_2001.md|14 col 537| Technology is viewed not so much as an artefact, but as a series of relations and connections between artefacts, physical and mental skills, desires and interests, concepts and information. Seen in these terms, inventiveness should not be equated with the development of novel artefacts, or indeed with novelty and innovation in general. Rather, inventiveness can be viewed as an index of the degree to which an object or practices is associated with opening up possibilities.  ... What is inventive is not the novelty of artefacts and devices in themselves, but the novelty of the arrangements with other objects and activities within which artefacts and instruments are situated, and might be situated in the future.(211-2)
/home/mackenza/notes/callon_barry_slater_2005.md|3 col 142| It is impossible to think of markets and their dynamics without taking into account the materiality of markets and the role of technological devices. The anthropology of technology might be very helpful if we want to understand better how markets are stabilised and organised. 101
/home/mackenza/notes/callon_economization_092010.md|28 col 18| The assembly of devices
/home/mackenza/notes/callon_economization_092010.md|61 col 43| machines, instruments or, more generally, devices effecting this controversial
/home/mackenza/notes/callon_economy_qualities_2005.md|9 col 44| The establishment of distributed cognition devices, intended to organize real-life experiments on preferences, tends to blur habitual distinctions between production, distribution and consumption. Design, as an activity, that crosses through the entire organization, becomes central: the firm organizes itself to make the dynamic process of qualification and requalification of products possible and manageable. 45
/home/mackenza/notes/castells_mobile_com_2005.md|6 col 79| Because the network grows incrementally with every new access point and every device capable of receiving Wi-Fi signals, there is no need for incentives to convince a monopoly provider to build expensive infrastructure. 102
/home/mackenza/notes/cesagen.md|44 col 518| %X Synthetic biologists engineer complex artificial biological systems to investigate natural biological phenomena and for a variety of applications. We outline the basic features of synthetic biology as a new engineering discipline, covering examples from the latest literature and reflecting on the features that make it unique among all other existing engineering fields. We discuss methods for designing and constructing engineered cells with novel functions in a framework of an abstract hierarchy of biological devices, modules, cells, and multicellular systems. The classical engineering strategies of standardization, decoupling, and abstraction will have to be extended to take into account the inherent characteristics of biological devices and modules. To achieve predictability and reliability, strategies for engineering biology must include the notion of cellular context in the functional definition of devices and modules, use rational redesign and directed evolut
/home/mackenza/notes/cesagen.md|563 col 184| %X Synthetic biology is an increasingly high-profile area of research that can be understood as encompassing three broad approaches towards the synthesis of living systems: DNA-based device construction, genome-driven cell engineering and protocell creation. Each approach is characterized by different aims, methods and constructs, in addition to a range of positions on intellectual property and regulatory regimes. We identify subtle but important differences between the schools in relation to their treatments of genetic determinism, cellular context and complexity. These distinctions tie into two broader issues that define synthetic biology: the relationships between biology and engineering, and between synthesis and analysis. These themes also illuminate synthetic biology's connections to genetic and other forms of biological engineering, as well as to systems biology. We suggest that all these knowledge-making distinctions in synthetic biology raise fundamental q
/home/mackenza/notes/clark.md|13 col 166| Minds make motions, and they must make them fast-before the predator catches you, or before the prey sets away from you. Minds are not disembodied logical reasoning devices. (Clark, 1997, 1)
/home/mackenza/notes/clark_natural_born_cyborgs.md|7 col 14| The learning device itself changes as a result of organism-environment interactions; learning does just alter the knowledge base for a fixed computational engine, it alters the internal computational architecture itself. (84)
/home/mackenza/notes/fortun_promising_2005.md|8 col 65| Nietzsche’s promise, science’s promise, is not an anchoring device. The ‘being of exceeding’ is a different kind of promise than the Arendtian one; it operates not through establishing certainty, but through the risky affirmation of a recurring, iterative opening rather than anchoring of a future. This promise is implicated in the inhuman innards of technoscience. This promise is a fragment of the future implicated in the hidden folds of the present, freeing it rather than anchoring it. This promise is a chip of futural excess, invisibly disrupting the reproduction of the same, to experiment on the new. Science becomes such that it always seeks its own preemption, always promises to exceed itself, always makes it possible to always go beyond. 165
/home/mackenza/notes/javaspaces.md|3 col 64| By early in the new millennium, a large class of computational devices – from desktop machines to small appliances and portable devices- will be network-enabled. This trend not only impacts the way we use computers, but also changes the way we create applications for them: distributed applications are becoming the natural way to build software. “Distributed computing” is all about designing and building applications as a set of processes that are distributed across a network of machines and work together as an ensemble to solve a common problem (2)
/home/mackenza/notes/jini.md|3 col 26| The vision of legions of devices and software services working together, simply and reliably, has been been espoused by a number of researchers and computer industry leaders (3)
/home/mackenza/notes/jini_core_specification.md|3 col 55| A system of JiniTM technology-enabled services and/or devices is a JavaTM technology-centered, distributed system designed for simplicity, flexibility, and federation. The Jini architecture provides mechanisms for machines or programs to enter into federation where each machine or program offers resources to other memberes of the federation and uses resources as needed. The design of the Jini architecture exploits the ability to move Java programming language code from machine to machine and unites, under the notino of a service, everything from the user of a system of Jini technology-enabled services and/or devices, to the software available on the machine, to the hardware components of the machines themselves () i
/home/mackenza/notes/latour_aramis.md|37 col 242| For the engineer substitutes for the signs he writes the things that he has mobilized; he attaches  them to each so they’ll hold up; then he withdraws a little, delegating  to another self, in the form of a chip, a sensor, or an automatic device, the task of watching over the connection. And this delegating allows him to withdraw even further-as if there were an object. (Latour, 1996, 81)
/home/mackenza/notes/lewitt.md|4 col 90| Conceptual art is not necessarily logical. The logic of a piece of series of pieces is a device that is used at times only be ruined. Logic may be used to camouflage the real intent of the artist, to lull the view into the belief that he understands the work, or to infer a prardoxical situation (such as logic vs. illogic) (13)
/home/mackenza/notes/linux_announcement_1991.md|26 col 11| their own device drivers? Are you without a nice project and just dying
/home/mackenza/notes/linux_devices.md|5 col 61| Almost every system operation eventually maps to a physical device. (5)
/home/mackenza/notes/linux_devices.md|7 col 77| So far, we've talked about the Linux kernel from the perspective of writing device drivers. Once you begin playing with the kernel, however, you may find that you want to "understand it all." In fact, you may find yourself passing whole days navigating through the source code and grepping your way through the source tree to uncover the relationships among the different parts of the kernel.  (http://www.xml.com/ldd/chapter/book/ch16.html)
/home/mackenza/notes/marres_weltverede_2012.md|7 col 42| The focus on the empirical deployment of device-specific categories gives yet another twist on the sociological debate about the status of its categories. The aim is not only to determine which formats and categories are analytically most productive for social research, i.e. to determine relevant ways of the carving of the world. It is also a question of operationalising devices with currency in social life ‘out there’ for purposes of social research. 326
/home/mackenza/notes/merleau_ponty_eye_mind.md|15 col 46| The picture and the actor's mimickry are not devices to be borrowed from the real world in order to signify prosaic things which are absent. For the imaginary is much nearer to, and much farther away from, the actual – nearer because it is in my body as a diagram of the life of the actual, with all its pulp and carnal obverse exposed to view for the first time (164-165)
/home/mackenza/notes/project.md|6 col 102| Within the profession, and within the organisation we studied, much effort is expended on contriving devices which will provide 'orderliness' in the conduct of work and in ensuring that such devices can be implemented and enforced. These devices are meant to enable the achievement of orderly work where it requires the collaborative participation of many individuals, and may, crudely, be characterised as devices which are designed to create and support teamwork; 373
/home/mackenza/notes/project.md|8 col 36| Engineers have to use a variety of devices that are not prescribed by the arrangements of the project in order to work up the project, and it is thus through the use of these devices that, (i) the character of work as project work is achieved, and (ii) that the contingencies of development are practically contended with in relation to whatever details the unfolding course of the development turns up. The organisation of engineering work as project work is thus located in these devices which engineers use in doing their work and it is to a description of these that we now turn. 373
/home/mackenza/notes/project.md|10 col 302| Generally speaking, within the world of work, efforts may be made to 'upgrade' activities, and within the particular work-a-day world of engineers efforts are made to upgrade the production of documentation in order to ensure that it is built into the engineer's work. Upgrading the work is a general device that is used to ensure that 'dirty work' gets done and vithin software engineering there are a number of such upgrading devices that are red in this respect. 382
/home/mackenza/notes/ruppert_savage_law_2013.md|3 col 38| Instead we need to explore fields of devices as relational spaces where some devices survive and dominate in particular locations while others are eclipsed, at least for the moment. 13
/home/mackenza/notes/savage_descriptive_2009.md|4 col 36| and produced in social inscription devices, as a means of considering the robust-
/home/mackenza/notes/tanenbaum.md|4 col 180| The other broad category of system calls relates to the file system. As noted before, a major function of the operating system is to hide the peculiarities of disks and other I/O devices, and present the programmer with a nice, clean abstract model of device-independent files. 16
/home/mackenza/notes/terranova_network_2004.md|10 col 416| Biological computing offers us an insight into a wider mode of soft control that takes as its focus the space-time of the swerve – that between the moment when the model is constructed, through the positioning of constraints and a local determination of behaviour, and the moment of emergence of useful or pleasing forms that are selected by exercising pressure or looked for through the elaboration of searching devices. 117-118
/home/mackenza/notes/thibaud_walkman_2003.md|6 col 44| The Walkman functions like a technological device that introduces the senses within the urban territory. The thresholds, knots, and arrangements it creates need to be apprehended .. according to the variable combinations of visibility and audibility. 340
/home/mackenza/notes/zehle_african_software_2005.md|321 col 1| devices in poorly equipped computer science departments. Yet
