# What I did

Cut some material where possible -- for instance, on scale (Tsing)
Added more on Github
Changed much of the argument towards a field of devices notion, as suggested, but also shifting the mode of writing of the piece towards a substantive argument about culture today. Before I was thinking that a handbook entry should be a kind of survey. To be honest, it is unusual for me to allow a piece of writing to be so deeply reshaped by editorial suggestions, but in this case I needed to do that.   

# Quotes to use

The focus on the empirical deployment of device-specific categories gives yet another twist on the sociological debate about the status of its categories. The aim is not only to determine which formats and categories are analytically most productive for social research, i.e. to determine relevant ways of the carving of the world. It is also a question of operationalising devices with currency in social life ‘out there’ for purposes of social research. 326 [@Marres_2013]

A second kind of space established by scientific and technological development is what Arjun Appadurai has called technoscapes and I have called technological zones of circulation.  These are spaces formed when  technical devices, practices, artefacts and experimental materials are made more or less comparable or connectable. They therefore link together different sites of scientific and technical practice. Such zones take different forms. The points of access to the zones may be more or less clearly marked, with more or less well-defined and functioning gateways. (202-3)

# Savage's comments

- This is a terrific chapter. You talk with great authority about the digital challenge and make some great observations about patterns, visualisations etc. These are huge issues for cultural sociology and this paper is a great contribution towards thinking about them
- At times, you could extend the implications for cultural sociology itself. One way would be to explore whether visualisations allow a new aesthetic orientation, in the way that Louise Amoore suggests in her work on e-borders (see her recent book). 
- I also wonder about whether these pattern and digital flows have the effect of rendering the social/ cultural as a field in Bourdieu’s terms, i.e. a set of relationships in contact and contestation? It could be argued that they inherently separate, distinguish and demarcate and thus allow complex field dynamics to operate. 
- Am sending on a couple of other chapters which might be useful for comparison, development, Nick Couldry who has a different perception on the significance of big data (I expect you will not go along with this, exactly, and it might be interesting for you to spell this out) and Martin and Merriman which is pretty good on fields and may provide some hooks for you to link to….


# From couldry's chapter

But it is this everyday embedding of algorithms in the stuff of culture which has generated both a sense of the ‘end of cultural sociology’ and the new opportunities for empirical sociology which are this chapter’s main focus. 

The conflict that arises from the embedding of measurement into the very texture of everyday experience is real, not trivial. 

Admittedly, the involvement this project involved in an organization’s day-to-day life might still to some seem a strange topic for the sociology of culture. But things look different when one realises that it is here - in how organizations gather data about their websites’ workings and others’ interactions with them, how they think about their websites’ metadata and its uses, and in their reflections on how, as organizations, they might change in response to such cumulative information –  it is here, in raw form, that everyday battles to make sense of a data-saturated world in terms of social actors’ own goals, not data production alone, are conducted


# From Martin and Merriman
But in the field theoretic perspective, a field is a global organization of vectors (pushes and/or pulls in a certain direction) that arises from the local mutual interactions of elements. 

We will argue that the field theoretic approach of Bourdieu implies a path of generalization that can only be called a social aesthetics. 

In other words, it is not that culture is an “also” to “structure,” nor that culture “is often important” in “causing” or “reproducing” structure.  It is that our best tools for the investigation of social structure involve understanding those sorts of trans-individual regularities in the distribution of subjective states that we consider culture.

Thus there is a way in which the very existence of second-order judgments suggests the possibility of a general field approach to at least one aspect of culture.

we may need to begin a social theory of perception with a field perspective not because we happen to like field theory, but because this is where the processes involve have the greatest ecological validity, and where we can dispense with overly scrupulous attention to attribution and, without denying that there are always errors, determine why social judgment works for action as well as it does.  


But in the field theoretic perspective, a field is a global organization of vector field that is created by movement across a texture to tell us where we are, which way we are headed, and what we are likely to hit.  The organization of the texture, the preservation of the principles of organization in the optic array, and the development of our sensory-motor system in a world with such principles of organization, allows us to make extremely efficient inferences that we could not do deliberately.

# couldry's text

## RESEARCHING SOCIAL ANALYTICS: CULTURAL SOCIOLOGY IN THE FACE OF ALGORITHMIC POWER
NICK COULDRY, LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS

6625 words

A new topic of research is opening up for cultural sociology: social actors’ everyday use and reflections on ‘analytics’, that is, any digital tools that measure them and their presence in a world of online presences. I call this study ‘social analytics’. This topic emerges at a moment when the longer histories of science and technology studies (STS) and phenomenology are intersecting in interesting ways in the digital age. Paradoxically at the same time some leading sociologists of culture fear that reflexive agency is no longer there to be studied, crushed out of existence by the all-encompassing force of ‘algorithmic power’ (Lash 2007). This premature fear of something like ‘the end of cultural sociology’ ignores the phenomenological richness of everyday struggles with the countless digital tools whose operations are now deeply embedded in routine action. This chapter offers a schematic programme for such research, set against the background of theoretical debates about the changing nature of power in the digital age. It defends, albeit in new form, a phenomenologically-influenced sociology of culture that is interested less in the reproduction of ‘society’ or in the measurement of society’s macro-variables, and more in the changing material conditions for the presentation of the self: the ‘self’ not just of individuals, but also of groups and organizations.i 

The institutionally directed circulation of media products has been a routine feature of everyday life in rich countries for nearly 2 centuries; it has intensified particularly over the past 20 years due to the emergence, as basic resource, of the worldwide web with its infinite space of content production and dissemination. We know something about media’s broader consequences for the presentation of the self as originally conceived by Goffman (Meyrowitz 1985 on Goffman 1961), but less about its details. Indeed, in spite of the separate development of media and communications studies as a discipline (or interdisciplinary space) over the past 30 years, there has remained a lack of attention, even in specialist work on media consumption, to the variety of things people do with media. We have known for three decades that people interpret media texts in a variety of ways (Morley and Brunsdon  1980; Ang 1986), but ‘audience studies’ has become increasingly uncertain that it can map the variety of things people do with media (Alasuutaari 1997), concentrating often on the most engaged members of the media audience. Meanwhile, people’s individual trajectories through the rich and vast textual space of contemporary media remains surprisingly underexplored (see Couldry 2000: chapter 3).  It has been in relation to taste and mainly in France where this problem has been best addressed: there, in explicit disagreement with Pierre Bourdieu’s large-scale theory of the reproduction of class and social difference through taste, Bernard Lahire has insisted on the complexity of individual consumption practice and the inability of general models to capture it (Lahire 2004; Lahire 2011). 

The wider problem is how, in a sociology serious about addressing the ‘complexity’ of contemporary culture (Hannerz 1992), we can be adequate both to the open-ended diversity of individual adaptations of the cultural stuff around them and to the continuous work of power through such diversity. While Pierre Bourdieu’s insight into the ‘de facto division of labour of social production with regard to major varieties of experience’ (Bourdieu 1992: 118) remains fundamental, the modes of ‘social production’ are changing radically; in a digital age work they work at multiple levels that encompass how not just taste but also social being is measured for competing institutional ends.  

In the world where (at least in the global North) access to the infinite informational reserve of the internet is available to most people at most times of the day, the ‘textualization’ of the world is taken to a more intense level. The uncertainties about what people do with such textual excess are multiplied. Interestingly, a version of the same problem matters hugely to cultural producers too, since they no longer can be sure of reaching audiences most effectively through general modes of address (the mass advertisement). The resulting turn within advertising culture (Turow 2007; 2011) towards niche marketing and data-driven tracking of individuals (uniquely specified, even if their name has been stripped away) addresses this problem, but at a high social cost: the embedding of continuous surveillance and algorithmically-based data collection into the consumption process. Whenever we go online, we are lured into this surveillance space where it is the aim of the software designers who shape our micro-access to the web to ‘turn every customer touch point  . . . into a point of sale’ (quoted Turow 2007: 123). The infrastructure to deliver this new form of micro-advertising is based on algorithms: automated processes of counting, tracking and aggregating data and metadata. But it is this everyday embedding of algorithms in the stuff of culture which has generated both a sense of the ‘end of cultural sociology’ and the new opportunities for empirical sociology which are this chapter’s main focus. 

The conflict that arises from the embedding of measurement into the very texture of everyday experience is real, not trivial. Jose Van Dijck sums it up well when she writes: ‘content and content management have become virtual synomyms in the ecosystem of connective media. Even when the aim of platforms is not to exploit content for monetary gain, as in the case of Wikipedia, content can only be made functional or valuable if it is managed through systems operating on the dual premise of “authentic” yet manipulated processing’ (Van Dijck 2013: 162). Cultural sociology’s task is to think and research beyond this conflict, registering how it is worked through in the everyday life of social actors. This takes us into an area where the measurement inherent to the world of taste is generalized and radically routinized in a new deepening of ‘the social’ and social pressures. I will explore this first from the perspective of theoretical debates about the consequences of algorithmic power, approaching questions of empirical detail only later in the chapter. 

Sociology of Culture and the Problem with Algorithmic Power

The empirical topic of social analytics emerges against the background of the predominance of largely theoretical speculations on the consequences of algorithms for social life. No one would disagree that algorithmic processes are now increasingly salient in the texture of everyday life (Halavais 2008, Lash 2007, Burrows 2009, Gillespie forthcoming). But for some writers, the deep embedding of algorithmic technology within everyday phenomena creates ‘a collapse of ontology and epistemology’ (Lash 2006: 581), installing a power-laden regime of ‘facticity’ (Lash 2007: 56) in which ‘there is no time, nor space . . . for reflection’ (Lash 2002: 18). If Lash is right, why pay close attention any more to what actors say when they ‘reflect’ on their position in the social world? But accepting Lash’s line of argument means ignoring a key site of tension in a digital age when social actors are struggling to make effective use of analytics in particular social contexts. We need to follow such struggles or miss an opportunity to build a richer account of the folded realities of the digital age. 

Registering the deep embedding of algorithms in social knowledge is, as David Beer has argued, not enough. Sociology must also ‘focus . . . on those who engage with the software in their everyday lives’ (Beer 2009: 999). If an earlier phenomenology advanced by grasping how ‘we derive our sense of self from the image of our self that others reflect back to us in interaction’ (Crossley 2001: 143, summarising Cooley 1902), a contemporary phenomenology must explore how today’s social actors interact with the algorithmically generated versions of themselves that derive from the internet’s embedding in everyday life. 
It is worth looking in more detail at what is stake in David Beer’s helpful commentary on Lash’s bold pronouncements concerning ‘power after hegemony’ (Lash 2007). 

Lash argues we now inhabit a regime of power that is mainly ‘ontological’ because based in the pre-arrangement of life’s informational infrastructure (2007: 56). There is no doubt of the sociological importance of how ‘categorization’ - a key process in the constitution of social order since Durkheim (Durkheim and Mauss 1960; Bowker and Star 2000) - now has become, in part, automated and, as such, central to all consumption and information seeking online, as well as many aspects of government (Amoore 2011). ‘Categorization’ is no longer just something social individuals do within an open process of socialization: it is something done consistently to them and their actions. Yet it occurs not openly, but in the background, shaping (through advertisers’ and sales entities’ automated systems) what we can buy and at what price (Turow 2007), configuring (through the operations of their internal algorithms) what standard search engines reveal to us when we look for basic information (Paliser 2011), and shaping (through the operation of web analytics) how an organization appears in the world to the constituency of people who interact with it (funders, investors, supporters). Algorithms shape fields of action in advance by shaping how things, people and organizations get counted, presented and seen. 

But Lash goes further, reading these developments as a shift in the very nature of power from ‘hegemony’ that works externally on power’s subjects through their minds to a generative ‘force’ that works within subjects and objects (2007: 56), a shift from ‘normativity’ to ‘facticity’, ‘epistemology’ to ‘ontology’. A problem with Lash’s dramatic account is that power based on norms, epistemology and authority has always also been condensed into reified forms that support such power. The idea that power has suddenly shifted its very nature to be more ‘ontological’ underestimates both the consistent role of reification (Honneth 2012) throughout history and people’s opportunities from time to time to bring power’s workings, however reified, to the surface, confronting ontological ‘fact’ with epistemological challenge. For sure, the workings of algorithmic power pose many challenges as its analysts note, not least through the hidden and highly technical nature of many of its operations (Halavais 2008, Gillespie forthcoming), but  popular contestation, although it has taken a long time to emerge, is now emerging, and is far from trivial as a cultural process. A longer tradition of power analysis has always taken seriously the difficulty of challenging long-established power-blocs that rely on well-established symbols and, in the media age, on intense monopolies of symbolic power. Think of Alberto Melucci’s (1996) work on ‘symbolic power’, resistance and ‘naming’ with its roots in Paolo Freire’s conscientization theory which had proclaimed the importance of renaming the world, not just challenging the details of its explicit knowledges (Freire 1982). But Lash’s generalized philosophical commentary misses these longer-term historical resonances of current battles over algorithmic power. Admittedly, Lash can claim on his side a number of theoretical writers about power, particular within the post-structuralist tradition (from Lacan to Hardt and Negri), but that only reinforces the point that such philosophical commentary is rather divorced from the struggles to rename the world already familiar within the everyday. 

The historic shift however that Lash rightly registers is that ‘power through naming’ (or what we might call ‘deep’ categorization) is now embedded in a many-levelled technologically-established interface of unprecedented complexity that is not just generally opaque but technically very difficult to unbundle, let alone reverse. Recently US legal theorist Julie Cohen has captured this well when she writes that ‘the configuration of networked space is increasingly opaque to its users’ (2012: 202) and that its web of protocols, data requirements and data monitoring has created a ‘system of governance that is authoritarian’ because it is so difficult to challenge (2012: 188-189). This is a very important point, but it is not the same as saying that such power cannot in principle be challenged. Indeed Cohen’s writing is just one element in a slowly building wave of challenge to the ‘facticity’ of the digital infrastructure: other examples come from information science (Mejias 2013), cultural studies (Van Dijck 2013), popular commentary (Lanier 2013, Paliser 2011), and social psychology (Turkle 2011). All of this writing directly raises normative questions about ontology and its impacts on epistemology: so much for the replacement of epistemology with ontology! 

David Beer’s (2009) commentary on Lash is helpful because, while acknowledging the force of Lash’s intervention, he insists on some basic empirical questions. Once we put to one side generalizations about ‘the mediatisation of life’, ‘ubiquitous media’, and ‘a transcendental which is already there in the empirical’ (Lash 2007: 70, 71, 74), certain empirical questions must be asked in a world where algorithms are deeply and pervasively embedded in culture, that is, in the making of meaning and our experience of the world. Those questions concern (1) ‘the organizations that establish and cultivate Web 2.0 applications’, (2) ‘the actual operations and functionality of the software packages that organise our web experience’, and (3) (most importantly for my argument here) how the outcomes of (1) and (2) ‘play out in the lives of those that use (or do not use) participatory web applications’ (Beer 2009: 998). We can broaden the implications of Beer’s argument beyond interfaces that are formally participatory. Beer is interested in people’s ability to interact with the processes that are classifying them through what he calls a ‘classificatory imagination’ (2007: 998). Why not research the overall phenomenology of living reflexively in a world where algorithmic classification is embedded in multiple ways, even if often hidden from all but the most expert actor?  How people act in this digitally-saturated, always-under-categorisation world is the object of ‘social analytics’ research. Contra Lash, there is no question of reflexivity going missing from this world. Beer himself makes this clear: ‘this is not to say that individuals are unable to reflexively play with algorithmic power to their own advantage. It might be that as users begin got see how the information that they provide in the form of content impact on the constitution of their life-worlds, so they may begin to actively shape the information so as to direct the way that the software reacts to them’ (Beer 2009: 997). Yet this reflexivity - a topic of direct empirical importance to the project of social analytics - had been ruled out by Lash as an empirical possibility. 

Tarleton Gillespie (forthcoming) considers a complex form of reflexivity on the production side of algorithms: producers responsible for maintaining the public face of algorithm-driven platforms (like Twitter) must reflect constantly on the interplay between their ‘technical’ adjustments and the signals that their platform appears to send publicly to its users. Gillespie rightly insists that algorithms are not determining objects beyond human intervention; rather they are ‘both obscured and malleable’ (if they were wholly made public, the likelihood of people acting so to as manipulate their ‘performance’ would be too great). Gillespie is concerned with the role of algorithms on highly public platforms and interfaces such as Google and Twitter: such platforms he calls ‘public relevance algorithms’.  He insists that we need a sociology both of such algorithms’ production and of how users react to, and act on the basis of, their background role. Such algorithms have broad consequences for the ontology of our public world (to this extent again Lash is right). According to Gillespie, platform users strive to become ‘algorithmically recognisable’, gaming the logics of search engines and algorithm-based platforms such as twitter (compare Beer 2009). That would certainly be part of ‘social analytics’, but a project of social analytics can look even more broadly at how actors draw on the basic workings of algorithms and analytics and seek to turn them consistently to their wider social ends. This might involve, to take a simple example, using customised analytics (that use algorithms as their basic mechanism) to heighten the clarity and intensity with which a particular website foregrounds and links up debate on a particular theme that matters to an organization. 

Sociologists of algorithmic ‘culture’ need not then have as their reference-point only the algorithms on which large-scale commercial platforms are based; they can also study the counting mechanisms that are, in part, conceived and devised by social actors to meet ends much closer to home. This picks up on the dimension of social construction that the best sociologists of software and code have always recognised (MacKenzie 2006). As Adrian MacKenzie puts it, ‘code, the material that lies at the core of software, is unstable because it is both expression and action, neither of which are materially or socially stable’ (2006: 177). In other words, the production and use of algorithms is part of the making of the social today, but operating at a level whose consequences are yet to be fully understood.

Such consequences therefore need to be traced through a sociology of action. If ‘taste classifies the classifier’ in Bourdieu’s famous phrase (Bourdieu 1984: 6), then the pervasive fact of background  algorithmic measurement ‘measures’ the social actor: it  shapes, in part, the ways in which such an actor can present herself or itself as social, as acting in a social world. Such shaping is open to reflexivity, at least under some conditions, just as is the face-to-face presentation of the self (Goffman 1961). We need empirical research that attends to such technologically-extended processes of reflexive agency, and that project is social analytics. 

The next section will explore in broad outline the possible topics for such a project. 

Doing social analytics

To appreciate this project’s scope, it is necessary first to define the core problem for social actors today for which social analytics, as it were, tries to listen out. This is the problem that agency – and particularly the presentation of self and identity - is now consistently mediated by calculative mechanisms of differentiation that, prima facie, are not open to adjustment by actors themselves. We are not talking here about anything analogous with how the physical infrastructure of an institutional setting mediates the presentation of self within that setting: notwithstanding some manifest inequalities of resource, such a infrastructure mediates the actions of all actors equally, even if their resources for acting within that setting may be unequal. That was the material context for the strategies and tactics for self-presentation in which Erving Goffman was interested.  But algorithms configure the stage of self-presentation in ways that, from the start, actively and cumulatively differentiate between actors: in that sense, the interface of analytics is itself an actor in the process of self-presentation, what Lash calls vividly ‘substance that thinks’ (2007:  70). Worse, the algorithmic interface is an actor whose operations are generally hidden from the actor that is trying to present her- or itself. Clearly, this opacity is an issue for any project of self-presentation, but only becomes an object of action and reflection to degrees that vary sharply, depending on the self-presenting actor and her or its circumstances and resources. 

The empirical work that social analytics involves thus can take many forms. I will discuss these in the following order: first, the tactics of individuals to resist what has been called the ‘quantification of the self’ (Gerlitz and Helmond forthcoming 2013); second, group tactics to ‘game’ the workings of particular algorithmic platforms; and third,  the longer-term practices of organizations to use analytics of various sorts as part of developing who they are. I will spend more time on the third case since it is the least studied. 

Individual tactics

Since Goffman, sociology has been interested in individuals’ practices for maintain a certain presentation of the self in everyday life. It has been clear for some time that the digital world affords many new means for presenting the self: from diary or commentary blogs to social media platforms to microblogging platforms like twitter. Studying their use is a clear extension of the study of the face-to-face presentation of self (see for example Livingstone 2008; boyd 2008). Such research only becomes ‘social analytics’ (in my sense) when part of the object on which practices act and reflect becomes the mechanisms for counting and measuring the self’s presence online and its effects. 

As David Beer points out in the passage already quoted, it is of sociological interest to follow how individuals begin to follow the relationship between the information they provide to calculative mechanisms (explicit or hidden) starts to ‘impact  . . . on the constitution of their life-worlds’ (2009: 997) and, through this, begin, by modulating the information they themselves generate, to aim at having a different presentation of self through the algorithmic platform in question: ‘the right profile’ (2009: 997) for whatever algorithm they are interacting with. Some algorithmic platforms are relatively clear in their operations, for example the platform Last.fm which counts up what users listen to and plays this back to them in the form of an available playlist. But many other algorithmic interfaces are much less open to be read and influenced, yet they may be crucial either to the presentation of self or to a person’s interface with the world, for example their Facebook newsfeed. 

We are only at the beginning of understanding how people’s presentation of self and relationship to the everyday social world is being shaped by a reflexive relationship with the analytics that are embedded in platforms of self-presentation: Daniel Knapp at the London School of Economics is doing pioneering work here (Knapp forthcoming). As Knapp points out, the largely occluded operations of the algorithms which shape individuals’ everyday interactional context constrains the degree of reflexivity possible, but certainly does not exclude it. Social analytics in this sense is a topic whose scope very much depends on the degree of technical literacy of the individual actor, but we can expect it to grow as a theme in the phenomenology of the digital age. 

Group Gaming

Because social analytics is concerned with interactions with calculative mechanisms that require data volume, groups, especially large distributed groups, have a major tactical advantage over the individual, because they can generate considerably more information and events for counting. They are therefore more likely to be able to see ‘real time’ results from their information inputs, and so start to ‘aim’ their further inputs accordingly. The result is what colloquially is called ‘gaming’ algorithmic interfaces. 

As algorithmically-based social media interfaces have started to become part of the assumed infrastructure of political and civic action, so sociologists and anthropologists have started to observe evidence of such ‘gaming’ as an explicit tactic by social movements concerned to influence the course of collective action through moment-to-moment coordination through such interfaces. In their study of a range of Twitter uses in political action, Segerberg and Bennett (2011: 213) note the importance of tracking the ‘user dynamics of hashtag use over time’, suggesting the possibility of such tactical (de Certeau 1984) interactions with the algorithms on which Twitter is based. Thomas Poell in his study of the use of Twitter by Toronto G20 protesters in 2010 (Poell forthcoming 2013) notes the possible longer-term tension between Twitter’s  concern to foreground topics that are trending (that is, attracting the largest volume of attention) versus protesters’ interest in maintaining a fuller record of their collectively produced messages. Those first two studies study some effective preconditions for a social analytics study, but coordinated gaming of the twitter platform starts to emerge more explicitly in Youmans and York’s study of the Syrian Electronic Army, a group supporting the current Syrian regime which was determined to drown out the Syrian opposition’s  messages on Twitter through the use of automated twitter accounts (Youmans and York 2012). The automated nature of this tactic however presents it from having the reflexive feature required for ‘social analytics’ research. 

The anthropologist John Postill however has however observed the social use of analytics directly in the actions of the indignados (or 15M) movement in Barcelona, Spain that protested against government cuts and economic injustice in 2011 (Postill forthcoming 2013). The use of Twitter in this movement (including the linked platform Real Democracy Now – ‘DRY’, Democracía Real Ya) went beyond the basic use of the platform as a means of communication through appropriate hashtags, and so on. As Postill explains: 

A key part of DRY’s strategy prior to the demonstrations was to make the campaign a regular occurrence on Twitter’s “Trending topics”. Knowing that Twitter’s trending algorithm favours novelty over volume . . . they succeeded by frequently changing the campaign keywords and encouraging followers to retweet the newly agreed hashtag so that it would ‘trend’, thereby reaching a much wider audience. (Postill forthcoming)

We can expect a huge variety of such ‘gaming’ practices to develop as familiarity with the logics of ‘public relevance platforms’ (Gillespie) spreads. Some, as Postill notes, will depend on the particular literacy and foresight of an elite organizational group; other tactics will be more distributed, depending on the sheer volume of informational inputs that large numbers of informed participants can generate if at least minimally focussed on a particular end-result. 

The examples so far suggest that social analytics involves the technological mediation of instrumental action without any tensions or contradictions. But as Veronica Barassi’s (Barassi forthcoming) work shows, a conflict may arise between the time needed to work on analytics (eg. the data-inputting necessary for influencing analytics or managing communications dependent on multiple digital platforms) and the time needed for the core activity of political action itself. Without wanting here to get into the specific dynamics of political action, this illustrates a broader point about the tensions inherent to using ‘measurement’ to achieve broader social ends. We will consider this in more detail in the next subsection which focuses on the social use of analytics within organizations.

Social Analytics on an Organizational Scale 

It was the use of measurement at an organizational level that suggested to me the idea of ‘social analytics’ as a wider project. This emerged from a participatory action project concerned to research the digital platforms and social conditions which support narrative exchange for purposes of encouraging voice and mutual recognition.ii The strand in question involved a reporter network (I will call them ‘C Media’) who trained community reporters and led a national network whose website presented the reports of those trained. When our fieldwork started, C Media’s website was not generating the traffic they wanted: C Media sensed it needed better metadata to present the themes of its reporters’ stories in a more effective way, but it did not know how to implement this. We quickly realised that, although our project was concerned with broader aims, to develop it in this strand there was no alternative but to become practically involved in acting and reflecting with C Media about how they used their website and its information architecture, to achieve their organizational purposes. 

During this developmental fieldwork (see Fotopoulou and Couldry forthcoming for more detail), it occurred to us that, in carrying out such ‘technical’ work, we were doing something more, something of considerable sociological interest. We were tracking how real actors used and reflected on analytics not for the sake of measurement itself (that emphatically was not C Media’s primary interest), but for the sake of meeting their broader social ends. We were tracking the process whereby a small civil society organization translated its ends as a social actor into a certain use of technical tools, that is, analytics. By ‘analytics’ here, more precisely, I mean both the automated measurement and counting installed within the operation of digital platforms (and associated websites, apps and tools) and adjustments made by actors themselves to, or around, such measurement and counting operations. Since, quite clearly, the use of analytics in this sense is unavoidable in the everyday practice of all organizations today (except perhaps those that want to avoid a public presence and, even then, analytics of a sort is needed to ensure this is achieved!), we were tracking the technical mediation of an organizational self, the reflexive process inherent to dealing with the technological interface through which organizations in the digital age must present themselves to and in the world. We were, if you like, doing a phenomenology under digital conditions. This insight was the birth of the project of social analytics (Couldry, Fotopoulou and Dickens forthcoming). 

Implementing such a project is however more complex than it first appears. This is because the process of reflecting and acting on one’s mode of ‘self-presence’ in an algorithmically-saturated world is complex. The primary means through which remove constituencies interact with an organization in most cases is its website, a particular multi-part presentation of its organizational ‘self’. But, once conceived as an organization’s means for presenting itself actively and cumulatively to the world, a website becomes a complex object of reflection. It depends on certain ‘inputs’ (information that could be presented), certain ways of presenting that information (which certainly could be otherwise), and certain ways of storing and then further presenting the cumulative force of how those visiting the site interact with the original presentation. Indeed the degree to which ‘interactivity’ with the site becomes thematized and made the object of active reflection is itself a key part of the translation process to be researched. All these levels, from the first (information inputs) to the last (the presentation of interactivity) involve the continuous accumulation and processing of information through basic counting, but also through coding (by which I mean here not initially the writing of computer code, but the systematic interpretation of, say, story contents or interactive events as belonging to a significant type or ‘code’). But which types matter to the wider story that an organization wants to tell about itself (more technically, what metadata it needs to tell that story through its website) is also a key part of the reflections that must be made explicit. So too are the processes of data collection and data sorting in which the organization is at any one time involved, or might (depending on what it is trying to do through its web presence) want to be involved in. The apparently simple process of developing a website through which an organization presents itself to the wider world becomes a window for observing a recursive process of reflection and action. 

In participating in such a process actively, sociologists need to monitor carefully the boundary between their practical involvement and the processes intrinsic to their own activity as sociologists, that is, the tracking of social actors as they act and reflect. This boundary-making requires an architecture of its own. In our project, it involved developing in explicit written form documents that gave an account of what the organization agreed it was setting out to do, and how it saw those aims being translated into digital form, including all the practical steps (such as information collection, metadata implementation, and the like), that such a translation involves.iii Without such documentation, we and C Media would have had no explicit reference-point against which to assess our collaboration, no statement of what it was we were jointly engaged in reflecting and acting upon. With that specified, however, pir research team was able, in a more conventional sociological way, to track, through participant observation, interviews and documentary and website analysis, the process of translating C Media’s digital presence into and through analytics as it was reflected upon by the actors involved. 

None of this fieldwork would have been possible, of course, without C Media’s very active collaboration; since C Media was very busy making the most of its limited resources to achieve its immediate ends, that collaboration would, in turn, have been impossible if our interests and C Media’s had not converged: C Media’s aim of promoting community voice) fitted with the wider interests of our research project. Both our and C Media’s interests, in that sense, looked past analytics: for C Media to the translation of its social aims through analytics, and for us as sociologists to understanding how that translation got done. Implementing that in detail of course involved its tensions, but these were resolved over time, as with any project of participatory action research. One can certainly imagine now carrying out other projects of social analytics research in different circumstances where there was not the explicit convergence between the researched organizations’ aims and those of the research project, but only because as sociologists of culture we have started making social analytics an explicit part of what we do!

Admittedly, the involvement this project involved in an organization’s day-to-day life might still to some seem a strange topic for the sociology of culture. But things look different when one realises that it is here - in how organizations gather data about their websites’ workings and others’ interactions with them, how they think about their websites’ metadata and its uses, and in their reflections on how, as organizations, they might change in response to such cumulative information –  it is here, in raw form, that everyday battles to make sense of a data-saturated world in terms of social actors’ own goals, not data production alone, are conducted. Far from compromising the tools and aims of cultural sociology, such empirical research is a means whereby sociology can address more adequately the irreducibly ‘calculative’ world in which social actors, including complex actors such as civil society organizations, must today act and on which, if they want to act well, they must continually reflect. Any less engagement on the part of sociologists with the technological aspects of the ‘presentation of the self’ means not engaging with how actors now have presence in a digital world. Acting with and on analytics (in the extended sense in which I have used the term) becomes part of actors’ toolkit in everyday life and sociologists who want to study everyday life as an ongoing construction must research this. 

Conclusion

In this chapter I have considered how a sociology of culture responds to the challenge of an algorithmically-saturated world. This involves not quarantining off the empirical domain in advance through generalized ‘philosophical’ argument about what power now is or how, in general, it must work, but rather paying close attention to the types of technologically-mediated, often frustratingly constrained action in which social actors are now engaged, and on which they must constantly reflect. 

I have sketched an outline of the resulting project of ‘social analytics’ that emerges from such an approach, first, by reviewing the state of the debate in the sociology of culture about the consequences of the deep embedding of calculative processes (performed through automatic measurement based on algorithms) in the texture of everyday life. If, as William Sewell, has eloquently argued, the ‘social’ is – and always has been - both ‘language-game’ and ‘built environment’ (2005: chapter 10), then so-called ‘algorithmic power’ is just the latest of the ways in which language-games get ‘hardened’ into the built environments for action with which actors must deal. 

The task of a sociology of culture, in response, is not to further reify the outcome by claiming, for example, that it leaves no space for reflexivity or resistance to power, but, on the contrary, as Sewell says, to contribute to the ‘de-reification of social life’ (2005: 369). Translated into practical terms, this means attending, through situated fieldwork, to social actors as they themselves struggle to de-reify the tools with which they must work in order to be present in the world in the ways they want to be. That is the purpose of social analytics, conceived as an empirical project at the heart of a sociology of culture that genuinely wants to address the challenges of a digital age. 
 

References

Alasuutaari, P. (ed.) (1999) Rethinking the Media Audience. London: Sage.
Amoore, L. (2012) ‘Data Derivatives: On the Emergence of a Security Risk Calculus for Our times’, Theory  Culture & Society 28(6): 24-43.
Ang, I. (1986) Watching Dallas. London: Routledge.
Barassi, V. (forthcoming) The Web and Everyday Critique: The Struggle Against Digital Capitalism. London: Routledge. 
Beer, D. (2009) ‘Power through the Algorithm? Participatory web cultures and the technological unconscious’, New Media & Society 11: 985-1002.
Bourdieu, P. (1984) Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1992) [with Terry Eagleton] ‘Doxa and Common Life’, New Left Review.  [old series] 191: 111-121.
Bowker, G. and Star, S. Leigh (2000) Sorting Things Out. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Morley, D. and Brunsdon, C. (1980) The Nationwide Audience. London: Routledge.
boyd, d. (2008) 'Why Youth ♥ Social Network Sites: The Role of Networked Publics', in D. Buckingham (ed.) Youth, Identity and Digital Media. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 119-142.
Burrows, R. (2009) ‘Afterword: Urban Informatics and Social Ontology’ in M. Foth (ed.) Handbook of Research on Urban Informatics, Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference, 450-454.
de Certeau, M. (1984) The Practice of Everyday Life. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Cohen, J. (2012) Configuring the Networked Self. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Cooley, C. (1902) Human Nature and the Social Order. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Couldry, N. (2000) Inside Culture: Reimagining the Method of Cultural Studies. London: Sage.
Crossley, N. (2001)  The Social Body. London: Sage
Durkheim, E. and Mauss, M. (1970) Primitive Classification. London: Cohen and West.
Freire, P. (1972) Pedagogy of the Oppressed. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Gerlitz, C. and Helmond, A. (forthcoming 2013) ‘The Like Economy: social buttons and the data-intensive web’, New Media & Society. 
Gillespie, T. (forthcoming) ‘The Relevance of Algorithms’ in T. Gillespie, P. Boczkowski, and K. Foot (eds.) Media Technologies. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Goffman, E. (1971) The Presentation of the Self in Everyday Life. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Halavais, A. (2009) Search Engine Society. Cambridge: Polity.
Hannerz, U. (1992) Cultural Complexity. New York: Columbia University Press.
Honneth, A. (2008) Reification: A New Look at an Old Idea. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lahire, B. (2004)  Le Culture des Individus. Paris: La Decouverte.
Lahire, B. (2011) The Plural Actor. Cambridge: Polity.
Lanier, J. (2013) Who Owns the Future? London: Allen Lane.
Lash, S. (2002) Critique of Information. London: Sage.
Lash, S. (2006) ‘Dialectic of Information’? A Response to Taylor’, Information Community & Society 9(5): 572-581.
Lash, S. (2007) ‘Power after Hegemony: Cultural Studies in Mutation’, Theory Culture & Society 24(3): 55-78.
Livingstone, S. (2008) 'Taking Risky Opportunities in Youthful content Creation: Teenagers' use of social networking sites for intimacy, privacy, and self-expression', New Media & Society 10(3): 393-412.
Knapp, D. (forthcoming 2014?) [thesis title to be inserted later], London School of Economics.
MacKenzie, A. (2006) Cutting Code. New York: Peter Lang.
Mejias, U. (2013) Off the Network. Minneapolis: Minnesota University Press
Melucci, A. (1996) Challenging Codes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Meyrowitz, J. (1985) No Sense of Place. New York: Oxford University Press.
Paliser, E. (2011) The Filter Bubble. New York: Basic Books. 
Poell, T. (forthcoming 2013) ‘Social media and the transformation of activist communication: exploring the social media ecology of the 2010 Toronto G20 protests’. Information, Communication & Society. 
Postill, J. (forthcoming 2013) ‘Democracy in an age of Viral Reality: a media epidemiography of Spain’s indignados movement’,  Journal of Ethnography. 
Segerberg, A., & Bennett, W. L. (2011) ‘Social media and the organization of collective action: Using Twitter to explore the ecologies of two climate change protests’. The Communication Review, 14(3), 197-215. 
Turkle, S. (2011) Alone Together. New York: Basic Books.
Turow, J. (2007) Niche Envy. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Turow, J. (2011) The Daily You. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Van Dijck, J. (2013) The Culture of Connectivity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Youmans, W. L and York, J. C. (2012) ‘Social media and the activist toolkit: User agreements, corporate interests, and the information infrastructure of modern social movements’. Journal of Communication 62(2), 315-329. 


# Martin and Merriman text

## A Social Aesthetics as a General Cultural Sociology?

John Levi Martin
Ben Merriman 

University of Chicago

### INTRODUCTION
A New Cultural Sociology?
Cultural sociology has often been considered a coherent approach that assumes the central role of culture in a large number of spheres of social life (see especially Alexander 2003).  This is in contrast to a more narrowly defined sociology of Culture, which more often focuses on, for instance, the production, distribution, consumption and reception of what are consensually taken to be Cultural products and services.  (We use small-c to indicate the more general, anthropological use of the word, and big-C to indicate the narrower one.)  The dominant understanding of cultural sociology has been one that emphasizes the importance of shared cognitions, most generally “schema” of different sorts, up to and including shared understandings of the most transcendent values.
    From such a perspective, the approach to the sociology of Culture associated with Pierre Bourdieu (especially 1984 [1979]) has been seen as threatening a materialism and reductionism that would destroy any appreciation of culture as autonomous (hence Alexander’s [1995] fierce critique).  There is a way in which this interpretation is quite correct: as we shall see, Bourdieu’s aesthetic theory mounted a sustained attack on the idea of purity, which he viewed as the greatest impurity of all, and to the extent that the plank of the autonomy of culture is used as a stand-in for such purity, there is indeed an unyielding opposition between the two perspectives.
    Yet a coherent elaboration of the field theoretic perspective that Bourdieu put forward, rather than being the negation of cultural sociology, is itself a cultural sociology, a systematic account of the role of culture in a wide variety of social domains.  Further, we argue that this general cultural sociology is by its nature an aesthetics—an examination of how actors respond to the qualitative properties of experience.  Thus we shall argue that aesthetics, rather than being an approach suitable only to specific areas of high cultural production and consumption, is the most reasonable model for a rigorous science of what we shall call action.1  This expansive role for aesthetics was a central tenet of the first generation of field theorists, though they influenced Bourdieu only indirectly.  Such a view is compatible with the more coherent aspects of Bourdieu's theorizing, and would likely have been his argument had he written his book on aesthetic theory as planned.  Below, we present a brief overview of a field approach to aesthetics, then offer a rereading of Bourdieu that suggests that his work may provide the basis for an aesthetic approach to social explanation.   We then argue that by focusing (as did Bourdieu in Distinction) on “second-order” judgments—judgments of judgments—we may be able to demonstrate the most fundamental ways in which this social aesthetics can point the way to a rigorous cultural sociology of action.

Bourdieu & Kant
We assume general familiarity with the approach of Pierre Bourdieu; here we focus on his work Distinction, for reasons that we make clear below.  Distinction was, as Bourdieu sub-titled it, a social critique of the judgment of taste, especially “pure” taste.  It is tempting to view Bourdieu's critique of Kantian purity as essentially agonistic rather than theoretically constructive.  But Bourdieu’s critique was not merely a war of words; his barbed presentation was necessary for us to understand the role of a certain type of judgment in social action.  It is not that Bourdieu was attempting to show the “functions” of pure taste, but rather, to allow us to understand what purity of taste is.  Just as the sacred is not made without reference to the profane, but rather is a separation from the profane, so pure taste—and the cultivation of pure taste—is a taste for purity.  The pure taste is not a taste that ignores the materiality of the common, but one that flees the common, though it may also involve embracing the common…when this is an uncommon choice (among a specific group of comparables).  In sum, purity is not escape from the world—it is a (dominant) position within the world.  For this reason, it can be an avenue to understanding the nature of the world.
    Further, taste, whatever its degree of purity, is a disposition to make certain types of judgments regarding certain types of objects that are already there.  We cannot understand the logic of the taste without understanding the logic that explains the dispersion and organization of the objects it encounters.  To take a familiar case as analogy, we all now understand that “race blind” policies mean and therefore are one thing in a world in which there is existing racial inequality and another in a world in which there is not.  The organization of tastes, and hence of positions taken, could not be independent of the configuration of positions that we call social structure if it wanted to—that is, if the organized tastes wanted to, which means that the tasters wanted to—and they don’t.  People do not want their tastes to be independent of the rest of social life because those who make judgments make them about that “rest of.” As we shall see, this is the key to making sense of Distinction as a general framework for cultural sociology.

### A BOURDIEUIAN CULTURAL SOCIOLOGY OF ACTION?
Restricted Application
It is not immediately clear that Bourdieu’s work really does provide anything like a general theory of action, despite the fact that many adherents have been emboldened to treat it as such.  For one thing, the specific set of social processes that interested Bourdieu are a subset of all social processes; further, to the extent that we focus on Bourdieu’s theory of fields, it is, as Bourdieu himself would have no trouble acknowledging, necessarily of restricted application because not all action takes place in fields.
Given that there have been somewhat unreasonable critiques of Bourdieu’s theory that are based merely on this selective interest (as if focusing on objectively strategic action were to make the strong claim that all human action is objectively strategic), one might seek to avoid further confusion by emphasizing in what ways Bourdieu’s theory is not a general theory of action.  Following this tactic, one would emphasize that this approach is at its best when confronted with specific, reasonably well defined, social fields.  However, there are paths towards generalization beyond such delimited fields.  We want to discuss two here.  

### The Field of Power The Field of Judgments
The first is the path that Bourdieu himself took.  We must understand that Bourdieu’s empirical work very often analyzed the behavior of actors in well defined fields of activities, often with clear organizational bases—for example, universities (Bourdieu 1988), art galleries (Bourdieu 1996a), and so on (Bourdieu 1993).  Such organizationally delimited or anchored fields (note that this is not the same thing as an “organizational field”) have two characteristics.  First, one's “position” may have a very clear relation to consensually understood organizational attributes: an appointment in some department, enrollment in some school clearly tied to an elite job, a column in some media outlet.2  People occupying positions in these fields can know in a very definite sense where they are, and where they are with respect to others in the field.  
Second, this analytic simplicity can lead us to propose the existence of different kinds of field-specific capital.  Such capital is, in essence, a reification of position (which is just what it should be, if we follow Marx—it is a social relation made into an object subject to appropriation by an individual); an actor, rather than being seen as occupying a particular place in a  world endowed with various qualities, can be said to “possess” a certain quantity of social substance.  This simplification is often imposed by social investigators, or may reflect the way that people in a field produce their own theories about its structure.  In either case, the notion of multiple specific capitals also suggests the existence of a mechanism for conversion by which, say, economic capital is exchanged for cultural capital.
And this was how Bourdieu moved to take a theory that might seem only applicable to specific fields, and give it a greater span.  That is, he relied on fixity of positions and identifiability of capital to attempt to situate the fields in an overall organizational topography, constructing what he called the “field of power.”
The perhaps mis-named field of power is less a field and more like, on the one hand, a central train station that allows one to move from one line to another and, on the other hand, a total free-for-all: a field without the rules.  Here is Bourdieu (1996b [1989]: 264f): “The field of power is a field of forces structurally determined by the state of the relations of power among forms of power, or different forms of capital.  It is also, and inseparably, a field of power struggles among the holders of different forms of power, a gaming space in which those agents and institutions possessing enough specific capital (economic or cultural capital in particular) to be able to occupy the dominant positions within their respective fields confront each other using strategies aimed at preserving or transforming these relations of power.”
That is, it is like a second round in which the winners of various fields, elites associated with different sectors, strive to determine the exchange rate between their capitals, to determine what is the dominant principle of domination.  In the crudest terms, for Bourdieu it tends to come down to the eternal struggle between the eggheads and the meatheads—those with cultural capital versus those with economic capital (or, most simply, us versus them, our rivals for power…at least in France, where the eggheads have a fighting chance).
We believe that this formulation was a fundamentally flawed one.  First, it took the homologies that might indeed be rather strong in France as if they were inherent to social judgment; second, it ideologically inflated the professoriate’s obsession with their being sidelined by economic elites as if it was a major structuring issue of modern societies; third, it somewhat fancifully imagined that through struggle of some sort elites could affect the exchange rates of their capitals (when, as any American sociologist can tell you, the exchange rate of economic for cultural capital remains stable at precisely $0 per bushel).  Fourth, and most important, Bourdieu’s conception makes the most sense in a highly structured, indeed, corporatist polity, in which there actually are relatively small and well-defined sets of different elites who interact with one another (hence Bourdieu’s “state nobility”), but it is implausible to use this to account for more fundamental homologies across fields.
That is, Bourdieu did indeed find many fields to have homologies in which there seemed to be a differentiation between those whose capital was mainly economic and those whose capital was mainly cultural.  But does this have anything to do with the struggles among the winners of each field? For although Bourdieu increasingly emphasized the field of power account as crucial for accounting for homologies, there was a simpler, more plausible, and more parsimonious account…in his own earlier work.
And this is simply that fields are embedded in a social space, and all are in the same social space.  Although some fields may recruit disproportionately from some areas of social space, and this does lead to interesting possibilities of complexity in terms of the formation of homologies, we can as a first approximation imagine that there will be some tendency to the overall organization of the relation of fields to one another coming from the fundamental fact of their non-independent fundaments.  Here we wish to return to Bourdieu’s key work on such social space (Distinction) and suggest that he has here in fact theorized a wide-ranging field of judgment.  That is, instead of going “up” as did Bourdieu to the “field of power”—to see how the victors in each field divide up the spoils—we go “down” to see the common substratum in the self-organized relations of all social actors.

### Field Theory and a Theory of Fields

First, it may help to make what may initially seem a paradoxical distinction, namely between a “field theory” and a “theory of fields.”  Field theory is a formal approach to thinking, first developed in physics, and then applied to social psychology by scions of the Gestalt/phenomenological schools in the mid-twentieth century and resuscitated by Bourdieu in the late twentieth.  A theory of fields is a particular approach to the exploration of the substantive phenomenon of fields; it may or may not have the formal characteristics of a field theory.  In fact, the most important such theory currently, that of Fligstein and McAdam (2012), does not rely on field theoretic principles, but rather focuses on common internal structural properties of fields, the relation between fields, the sorts of action that allow actors to successfully navigate or transform fields, and the relations of fields to wider political-economic structures and changes.  Such a theory of fields is clearly applicable to the more institutionally defined, “objectified” fields such as the discrete realms of production that Bourdieu often studied.
    But in the field theoretic perspective, a field is a global organization of vector field that is created by movement across a texture to tell us where we are, which way we are headed, and what we are likely to hit.  The organization of the texture, the preservation of the principles of organization in the optic array, and the development of our sensory-motor system in a world with such principles of organization, allows us to make extremely efficient inferences that we could not do deliberately.
The upshot of this side-trip into analogy is the following conclusion:  we may need to begin a social theory of perception with a field perspective not because we happen to like field theory, but because this is where the processes involve have the greatest ecological validity, and where we can dispense with overly scrupulous attention to attribution and, without denying that there are always errors, determine why social judgment works for action as well as it does.  
There is a second implication.  Given the “lemma of the environmental validity of social space” above—one which we believe no sociologist would deny—we can trust that we can “hang” judgments on social space, but not simply for our analytic purposes, the way we might regress counts of hen pecks on certain aspects of their social situation.  Rather, we are making the claim that actors make a similar “hanging” which means that they experience the judgments of others as socially organized.  Given that we have already concluded that judgments of judgments are, substantially, judgments, we understand that, first, they are immediate responses to the qualities of that which is judged (though we recognize that these qualities, being relations between perceiver and perceived, vary predictably across social space), which allows us to focus on what actors do—how they respond to objects and judgments—and not how they may be forced to defend these to interlocutors, whether hostile or friendly, lay or professional.9 

### Advantages of a Focus on Judgments
    In addition to the contributions made to a sociology of perception, we believe that such a general cultural sociology founded on the field of judgments has two other advantages.  For one, somewhat counterintuitively, we may find that a more emically adequate approach to cognition, one that begins with first person, qualitative experience, allows us to dispense with the individual as unit of analysis.  This in turn might allow us to produce strong theoretical statements about social perception and its relation to action without handling the complex, and potentially intractable, problems of a complete sociology of perception.   We may get analytic clarity whenever we reduce the number of elements, but especially so when our subjects and direct objects in a theory of action are properly consubstantial—that is, they are the same sort of thing.   Philosophers always had a hard time explaining how mind could know matter, but a very easy one explaining how mind could know mind (as long as the relation was unmediated by matter).   (Somewhat similarly, if we accept Bourdieu’s argument that we judge objects through embodied dispositional principles, then to the extent that sexual fields are bodies judging bodies, they may have this analytic flatness that allows for the development of a parsimonious theoretical vocabulary [Martin 2013; also see Green 2011].)
        James Coleman (1990: 8) famously argued that every “macroscopic” social relationship (say, between two variables in a social configuration, M1 and M2) was only a rough proxy that needed to be re-cast as three relations:   first, one from the seeming macroproperty to the actual microcomponents of individual characteristics and actions (M1m1; imagine a “down arrow”); second, a rigorous and plausible connection from these microelements to others (m1m2, “across”); and third, an understanding of how these resultant microelements aggregate to the observed macrocomponent (m2M2; “up”).   Thus the relation between Protestantism (M1) and capitalism (M2) discussed by Weber must be expanded to include the m1 of individual values and the m2 of individual economic behaviors.   Analogously, many accounts of social action that accept the importance of subjective phenomenology seem to be drawn to a similar “down-over-up” path (\_/) in which we must go into the subjectivity of the actor, disassemble it into recognizable components (such as “schemata,” “values,” “heuristics” or “tools”), link these in some way (often undertheorized), and then return up to the level of the actor.   To the extent that we focus on second-order judgments, we may be able to take a “high-road” in which we directly link judgment to judgment, avoiding the necessity of opening up heads.
            Second, focusing on second-order judgments can help correct possibly misleading conclusions that sociologists have derived from sociological studies of judgment.   If only for reasons of tractability, studies have tended to focus on asymmetric processes:   some are judges, rankers, or evaluators, and others are the judged, the ranked, and the evaluated.   But as Lamont (2012) in particular has argued, one of the most important forms of evaluative practice is peer-evaluation, in which all judges may be judged.   
                The sociology of judgments (quite understandably and correctly) tends to attempt to re-politicize decisions that are effectively de-politicized.   To make an algorithm that automatically ranks colleges (Espeland and Sauder 2007) is to seemingly de-politicize a choice in which power will be used to authoritatively determine allocations (on this dynamic see also Porter 1996).  Sociologists often attempt not only to unveil the precise mechanisms and machinations behind the stabilization of any particular set of criteria but (perhaps especially after their institutions go down a notch in the US News!) return these decisions to rough-and-tumble world of politics, where the rated can fight back.
                    Interestingly, that sort of world—one where raters fight back—seems to be increasingly where we’re headed.   At Amazon, rankers are ranked, and even more, in many venues, we find that we are allowed to choose our rankers (people who liked the things you liked like this…).   Such dynamics may be required for the emergence of an orderliness that is clearly distinguishable from patterns of judgment that may be fundamentally arbitrary, or at least may be effectively made to be arbitrary by a sociological critique.10   
                        Our argument is not that this sort of “judgment 2.0” is now more widespread than “1.0,” which would probably be impossible to determine and theoretically irrelevant anyway.   It is that such settings provide a better case for getting at the fundamental dynamics of judgment than one in which the judgment is channeled by, or attached to, exogenously defined structures that define asymmetry.   That is, the characteristics of emergent order shed the most light on the nature of the elements involved when these elements swim freely in an otherwise unstructured soup.  Moreover, as a descriptive matter, many evaluative practices that have been treated as asymmetric are, to a large extent, the products of group evaluative efforts in which judges devote a great deal of attention to their fellow judges and orient their actions accordingly.  Thus Lamont (2009) and Huutoniemi (2012) describe the production of academic consensus by the orientation of evaluators to the judgments of other evaluators, rather than toward the object being judged.11  
                            Finally, we note that focusing on judgments as opposed to actors may lead to greater clarity if actors are bundles of judgments that, for whatever reasons (accidents of history, say), do not sit well with one another.   Two people who share a passion for the work of Ernst Toch and believe themselves aligned are confused and upset that they disagree so virulently about the work of Brian Wilson.   It might be that strong forms of structure (for example, balance theoretic ones) apply well to judgments but poorly to persons for this reason.   In sum, to the extent that field theoretic principles have applicability to the social realm, it may be that they will find clearest expression in the field of second-order judgments.
                            We wish to take care not to assert that this approach is simply or unproblematically suitable to all problems.  Field theory cannot explain social phenomena that are not organized by a field.  Fields that are generally organized by routine behavior may nonetheless still produce phenomena that require deliberate, conscious thought (Leschziner and Green 2013).  And as Fligstein and McAdam (2012) would say, we must expect a form of “rolling turbulence” to scatter our nicely arranged vectors time and time again.  Nor does social action oriented toward the perceived judgments of others necessarily mean that actors fully understand one another.  Error and misunderstanding are common and sociologically interesting aspects of interaction (see, e.g., Gibson 2012).  In addition, certain fields may be based entirely on systematic misapprehension (Bourdieu, Passeron, and Saint Martin 1994).  Our sense of the judgments of others is necessarily incomplete, and yet it may amount to much of what we have to go on.

### CONCLUSION
Cultural sociology has concerned itself with the role of culture, broadly defined, in many domains of social life.  This perspective has been resistant to Bourdieu's critique of the presumptions underlying taste, and the general view of the sociology of Culture has been that this critique is properly confined to case of the production and evaluation of a relatively small class of goods.  However, the extension of this Bourdieuian sociology of Culture approach to second-order judgments may provide the basis for a cultural sociology in the broader sense.  The aesthetic view is ultimately an account of socially conditioned perception.  Such distinguishing, judging perceptions may play a significant role not only in the evaluation of a few high status objects, but also in providing a basis for social action with respect to other judging, perceiving actors.  The range of phenomena over which this perspective may be especially helpful is still being defined.  However, it is immediately useful in lending greater theoretical coherence to our notions of culture.  One thing that it seems almost all of us now accept is that there is no express train from social structure to social action that does not pass through perception.  But the reasoning outlined here suggests that there are routes that do not pass through quasi-propositional or schematic aspects of cognition, and so our sociology of culture cannot turn on elements that are not fundamental to action, even if evidence can be marshaled for their existence.  Action informed by perception, rather than complex scripts and schemes, enables us to understand culture as made of the things of the world, rather than a world crammed inside our heads.  

### References
Alexander, Jeffrey C.  1995.  Fin-de-Siècle Social Theory: Relativism, Reduction and the Problem of Reason.  London: Verso.
-----.  2003.  The Meanings of Social Life: A Cultural Sociology.  New York: Oxford University Press.  
 Arnheim, Rudolf.  1971.  Entropy and Art.  Berkeley: University of California.
 Becker, Howard S.  1982.  Art Worlds.  Berkeley:   University of California.
 Bennett, Tony.  2011.  “Culture, Choice, Necessity: A Political Critique of Bourdieu's Aesthetic,” Poetics 39: 530-546.
 Berleant, Arnold.  1970.  The Aesthetic Field: A Phenomenology of Aesthetic Experience.  Springfield, Illinois: Charles C.  Thomas.
 Bian, Yanjie, Ronald Breiger, Deborah Davis, and Joseph Galaskiewicz.  2005.  “Occupation, Class, and Social Networks in Urban China.” Social Forces 83: 1443-1468.
 Bourdieu, Pierre.  [1979] 1984.  Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste.  Translated by Richard Nice.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
 -----.  1988.  Homo Academicus.  Palo Alto: Stanford University Press.
  -----.  1993.  The Field of Cultural Production.  New York: Columbia University Press.
   -----.  1996a.  The Rules of Art: Structure and Genesis of the Literary Field.  Palo Alto: Stanford University Press.
    -----.  1996b [1989].  The State Nobility: Elite Schools in the Field of Power.  Palo Alto: Stanford University Press.
     Bourdieu, Pierre, Jean-Claude Passeron, and Monique de Saint Martin.  1994.  Academic Discourse: Linguistic Misunderstanding and Professorial Power.  Cambridge: Polity.
     Breiger Ronald L.  2000.  “A Tool Kit for Practice Theory.” Poetics 27: 91-115.
     Bryson, Bethany.  1996.  “'Anything but heavy metal': symbolic exclusion and musical dislikes.” American Sociological Review61(5): 884-899.
     Campos-Castillo, Celeste, and Steven Hitlin.  2013.  “Copresence: Revisiting a Building Block for Social Interaction Theories,” Sociological Theory31(2): 168-192.
     Cerulo, Karen A.  2009.  “Non-Humans in Social Interaction.”  Annual Review of Sociology 35: 531-552.
     Clayman, S.E., and A.  Reisner.  1998.  “Gatekeeping in action: editorial conferences and assessments of newsworthiness.” American Sociological Review 63: 178-199.
     Coleman, James M.  1990.  Foundations of Social Theory.  Cambridge: Belknap Press.
     Espeland, Wendy Nelson and Michael Sauder.  2007.  “Rankings and Reactivity: How Public Measures Recreate Social Worlds,” American Journal of Sociology113(1): 1-40.
     Fligstein, Neil and Doug McAdam.  2012.   A Theory of Fields.   New York:   Oxford University Press.
     Friedman, Asia.  2011.  “Toward a Sociology of Perception: Sight, Sex, and Gender,” Cultural Sociology5(2): 187-206.
     Gibson, David R.  2012.  Talk at the brink: deliberation and decision during the Cuban Missile Crisis.  Princeton: Princeton University Press.
     Gibson, James J.  1986 [1979].  The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception.  Hillsdale, New Jersey:  Lawrence Erlbaum.
     Goffman, Erving.  1967.  Interaction Ritual.  Essays in Face-to-Face Interaction.  Chicago: Aldine.
     Green, Adam Isaiah.  2011.  “Playing the (sexual) field: the interactional basis of systems of sexual stratification.” Social Psychology Quarterly74(3): 244-266.
     Huutoniemi, K.  2012.  Communicating and compromising on disciplinary expertise in the peer review of research proposals.  Social Studies of Science42 (6), 897-921.
     Jerolmack, Colin.  2009.  “Humans, Animals, and Play: Theorizing Interaction When Intersubjectivity is Problematic.”  Sociological Theory 27: 371-389.
     Johansson, Sverker.  2005.  Origins of Language: Constraints on Hypotheses.  Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
     Khan, Shamus and Colin Jerolmack.  2013.  “Saying meritocracy and doing privilege,” The Sociological Quarterly54(1): 9-19.
     Lamont, Michele.  2009.  How Professors Think: Inside the Curious World of Academic Judgment.  Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
     -----.  2012.   “Toward a Comparative Sociology of Valuation and Evaluation.”   Annural Review of Sociology 38:201-221.
      Leschziner, Vanina and Adam Isaiah Green.  2013.  “Thinking about Food and Sex: Deliberate Cognition in the Routine Practices of a Field,” Sociological Theory 31(2): 116-144.
      Lhermitte, F.   1986.   “Human Autonomy and the Frontal Lobes.   Part II:   Patient Behavior in Complex and Social Situations:   The ‘Environmental Dependence Syndrome.’”   Annals of Neurology 19:335-343.
      Lizardo, Omar, and Sara Skiles.  2012.  Reconceptualizing and theorizing “omnivorousness”: genetic and relational mechanisms.  Sociological Theory 30 (4), 263-282.
      Mack, Arien and Irvin Rock.  1998.  Inattentional Blindness.  Cambridge: MIT Press.
      Martin, John Levi.  2011.  The Explanation of Social Action.  New York: Oxford University Press.
      -----.  2013.  “The Crucial Place of Sexual Judgment for Field Theoretic Inquiries.”  In Sexual Fields: Toward a Sociology of Collective Sexual Life, edited by Adam Isaiah Green.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
       Martin, John Levi and Forrest Gregg.  Forthcoming.  “Was Bourdieu a Field Theorist?” in Bourdieu and Field Theory, edited by Mathieu Hilgers and Eric Mangez.  London:  Routledge.
       McBride, Jennifer, Petroc Sumner, Stephen R.  Jackson, Nin Bajaj and Masud Husain.  2013.  “Exaggerated Object Affordance and Absent Automatic Inhibition in Alien Hand Syndrome.” Cortex: in press.
       Menchik, Daniel A., and Xiaoli Tian.  2008.  “Putting Social Context into Text: The Semiotics of E‐mail Interaction.”  American Journal of Sociology 114: 332-370.
       Metzger, Wolfgang.  1986 [1967].  “Der Geltungsbereich gestalttheoretischer Ansätze.” Pp.  134-144 in Gestalt Psychologie, edited by Michael Stadler and Heinrich Crabus.  Frankfurt am Main: Verlag Waldermar Kramer.
       Metzger, Wolfgang.  1986 [1975].  “Die Entdeckung der Prägnanztendenz.” Pp.  145-181 in Gestalt Psychologie, edited by Michael Stadler and Heinrich Crabus.  Frankfurt am Main: Verlag Waldermar Kramer.
       Meyer, Leonard B.  1956.  Emotion and Meaning in Music.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
       Peterson, Richard A.   1992.   “Understanding Audience Segmentation: From Elite and Mass to Omnivore and Univore,” Poetics 21(4):243-258.
       Porter, Theodore M.  1996.  Trust In Numbers: The Pursuit of Objectivity in Scientific and Public Life.  Princeton: Princeton University Press.  
       Pugh, Allison J.  2013.  “What Good Are Interviews for Thinking About Culture? Demystifying Interpretive Analysis.”  American Journal of Cultural Sociology.  1: 42-68.
       Radway, Janice A.  1997.  A Feeling For Books: The Book-of-the-Month Club, Literary Taste, and Middle-Class Desire.  Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
       Rivera, Lauren.  2010.  Status distinctions in interaction: social selection and exclusion at an elite nightclub.  Qualitative Sociology 33, 229-255.
       -----.  2012.  “Hiring as Cultural Matching: The Case of Elite Professional Service Firms,” American Sociological Review77(6): 999-1022.
        Sharp, Shane.  2010.  “How Does Prayer Help Manage Emotions?”  Social Psychology Quarterly 73: 417-437.
        Vaisey, Stephen.  2009.  “Motivation and justification: a dual-process model of culture in action.” American Journal of Sociology 114: 1675-1715.


# My text

## Digital sociology: scale, pattern and feedback loops

Adrian Mackenzie, Richard Mills, Stuart Sharples, Matthew Fuller and Andrew Goffey


### Introduction
Digital sociology focuses on culture as it plays out in the vast, expanding, power-laden and complex textual and media environments of last few decades as they profoundly re-define culture. The object of analysis is culture as it is re-written digitally in settings such as cities,  cafes, airports, streets, shops, museums, parks, clinics, offices or living rooms as they are rewoven by  transient social publics of news, entertainment and social networking environments such as Twitter, Instagram, LiveJournal, YouTube, LinkedIn or Weibo. The methods of digital sociology vary widely, but nearly all address the problem of how to make sense of the data generated, captured, organised, shared, and constantly sorted in form of hyperlinks, messages, transactions, text, and images flowing across media platforms (Lupton, 2012). Digital social researchers seek to learn about the coherence, modes of thought and value, practices, materials and forms of contemporary experience distributed in space and time. They are especially concerned today with the emergence of what recent observers have called 'a massive, culturally saturated feedback loop' (Schutt and O’Neil, 2013: 5) between what people do  and what they see. In this 'culturally saturated feedback loop,' none of the objects, techniques and subjects of this form of the social are coherent, well-understood or stable. While digital sociology draws on methods such as ethnography, rhetorical, discourse and visual analysis,  new skills and digital tools, borrowed or copied from domains of statistics, software development, hacking, graphic design, audio, video and photographic recording and editing – that is, from the media-textual environments of contemporary culture themselves –  constantly come into play, with lesser or greater relevance. Social research in such settings, as Noortje Marres notes, 'becomes noticeably a distributed accomplishment: online platforms, users, devices and informational practices actively contribute to the performance of digital social research' (Marres, 2012: 139). The subject who researches, the social researcher, is affected by and more or less inadvertantly positioned in this feedback loop in a variety of ways. 
Digital sociology overlaps with, borrows from and seeks to make sense of much more prestigious, well-financed and heavily equipped practices in marketing, in scientific research, in government administration and commerce that target the expanded media environments of contemporary culture (Cukier and Mayer-Schoenberger, 2013). Scale and pattern are key problems in any contemporary social research. Scale and pattern can also allure social researchers. As danah boyd and Kate Crawford suggest, 'big Data tempts some researchers to believe that they can see everything at a 30,000-foot view' (boyd and Crawford, 2012).  (We largely leave aside any further discussion, analysis or critique of these developments. They are extensive and mulit-faceted, and can be seen at work in the digital humanities (Galloway, 2014), in cultural analytics (Manovich, 2011), in social physics and computational social science (Pentland, 2014)) But the mode of ordering – 'recurring patterns embodied within, witnessed by, generated in and reproduced as part of the ordering of human and non-human relations (Law, 1994: 83) – of digital sociology can differ greatly from  contenders and analogues such as 'data science' (Schutt and O’Neil, 2013), 'predictive analytics' (Prediction Impact Inc., 2009)  or digital humanities. Aiming to pay close attention to the ways in which the description of culture has become a key economic and social concern (Savage, 2009; Thrift, 2006), digital sociology might take shape less as a social science of digital culture than as the study of events that pattern lives, experience, power and value on various scales. This apparently limited ambition harbours some surprising expansive possibilities. It might cultivate 'a sociological sensibility not confined to the predominant lines of sight, the focal points of public concern' (Back and Puwar, 2012: 12) but able to develop novel empirical techniques of inquiry and evaluate the unprecendented volume of information we encounter. in turn, this might entail novel empirical practices and conceptions of the empirical (Adkins and Lury, 2009).
As we will see, particularly through the examples we draw from working with digital data from one moderately important social networking platform, GitHub.com, the process of finding important events on the various scales and amidst the intricate patterns of practice of culture is not at all straightforward. Patterns, it turns out, entwine with problems of scale in both contemporary culture and in its analysis. The case we draw on here – Github.com – is interesting precisely because what goes on there – coding and software development amongst other things– is both typical of the vast and somewhat incoherent spaces of contemporary culture, and at the same time plays an important practical role in re-scaling and re-patterning them. Launched in later 2007, Github at the time of writing (2014) claims to host around 13 million different code repositories and around 6 million users. These numbers, like all social media count data, need to be disaggregated and analysed (for instance, 'users' can include automated software processes that hourly commit new code to certain repositories; or many repositories are simply copies of other repositories, etc.), but they position Github as a mid-ranking social media platform in terms of size. But Github functions as massive software code repository for the many transindividual configurations that  materially texture increasingly large parts of people's lives, Moreover, it also serves as a model of making that attracts many other practices not directly related to software : how-to guides, metadata on the Tate's art collection, the White House's open data policy, legal documents, recipes, books, and blogs are just some of the diversifying use-cases now found in repositories on Github. As a recent article in The Atlantic suggests, Github is increasingly of interest to non-programmers because the de-centralised, distributed and trackable collaborative processes it offers for coding can be used for many kinds of documents: designs, legal documents, maps, images, books, blogs or websites (Meyer, 2013).  In this respect, Github, we might say, is an 'indexical icon' (Lee and LiPuma, 2002) of the scaling and patterning that confront digital sociology amidst the cultural metamorphoses. 

### Scales, scaling and scale-free networks

Work on culture has long addressed The anthropologist Anna Tsing writes: 'scale is the spatial dimensionality necessary for a particular kind of view, whether up close or from a distance, microscopic or planetary. I argue that scale is not just a neutral frame for viewing the world; scale must be brought into being: proposed, practiced and evaded, as well as taken for granted' (Tsing, 2005: 58). Scale refers to the relative dimensions of enlargement or a reduction in a map, picture or model, as well as the marks or degrees used to measure intervals (as in the scale on the axes of a scatter plot). Scale, however, is a verb as well as a noun. In digital culture, re-scaling or re-dimensioning is common.  The scaling-up of databases, of transactions, of geographies (e.g. Amazon's data-centres divide the globe into eight regions), and capacities in many settings testifies to one aspect of this re-scaling. Like many digital media, Github offers  analytic and empirical capacities that might help us engage with different scales and scalings. But wrangling these affordances in sociologically inventive ways entails much engagement with the practices and technical realities of digital platforms.  We might seek to craft ways of dealing with different scales, with wholes, with events and relations in Github, but the allures of totality or exhaustiveness powerfully distort and twist our efforts.  
The outstanding issue for digital sociology to date has been the problems and potentials of studying culture on scales that do not align to either the individual or the whole culture.  Given the scaling-up of digital infrastructure, there is a temptation to scale up empirical work. The conceptual poles of individual and whole culture have limited analytical purchase on open-ended, heterogenous and frequently re-scaling flows of contemporary cultural spaces. They are attached to more static concepts of agency and structure that have long been disputed (we are not re-visiting those debates here; see (Latour et al., 2012). For instance, while 'users' or consumers remain the focus of much market research and advertising, their demographic attributes of race, age, ethnicity, income and educational level are perhaps becoming less important as 'postdemographic' concerns of profiling in terms of groups, tastes, interests, device usage, etc., take hold (see (Rogers, 2013: 153–4)). The feedback loops between culture and technology mean that cultural processes change scale in many different ways. Digital sociology confronts the problem of working out if the scaling processes it observes are isometric (the same metric applies throughout) or allometric (different metrics are needed to make sense of the changes). On many accounts, network digital media display 'scale-free' characteristics – no matter what scale we look at, the same distribution of event types can be found. (We return to this issue below). 
Given this uncertainty about the units and wholes of social fields, issues of scale and scaling processes are centre-stage in digital sociology. We can glimpse some of the problems of scale in Github. At the time of writing (February 2014), around 170 million events are recorded on the Github.com timeline since early 2012. (The timeline is the name for the comprehensive time-stamped series of user-generated events. The timeline does not include events staged by the people who manage and constantly tweak Github as platform. Platform-level events – a change in architecture, modifications to interfaces, shifts in underlying design or management practice – are much harder to see from the data.) Many of these events are highly emphemeral. They have little afterlife. Someone creates a repository and puts something there, and then never returns. Millions of such events occur. But other events represent the kernel of enduring, cascading or expanding transitions.  In the flow of events marked on the Github.com timeline, there are some surprising features. For instance, the 18 months of Github event data graphed in Figure 1 shows growth.



We might not be surprised to see a steadily increasing count of events on a social media platform. (Github is, after all, a social media platform for coding). The pattern of growth is common to many digital media where isometric increases in scale are often promised. But here we see something anomalous. The number of events per week in April 2012 and especially September 2012 exceed the number of events per week at the end of 2013. Two peaks appear ealier than they should. These peaks reflect something about the way Github as a platform stored data rather than a dramatic turn of events (for instance, some kind of Github virality or contagion). 
Even if we manage to filter our these platform effects and archival anomalies (statisticians and scientists often have to clean data before they analyse it), events envelope fractal complexities. 'Push' events, for instance, occur when software developers move code from a local repository to a Github repository. While they are atomic events in Github's terms, PushEvents may comprise complicated 'payloads'. The payload complexity of events poses analytical problems. It subducts analytical work into the depths of highly localised practices, and disorients attempts to keep things on one scale. Sociologists have long been aware of the problem of there being too much to analyse in contemporary culture. To take a somewhat pre-digital sociology example, Nick Couldry writing in 1999 discussed at length how cultural studies could respond to the problem of 'too many texts' and proposed the notion of textual environments as a way of addressing this. 'We are looking', he writes, 'at a textual environment comprising complex patterns of flows: flows of meanings, texts and potential readers' (Couldry, 2000: 87). Even in this somewhat premonitory characterisation of 'vast textual fields' (87) as 'patterns of flows', the conventional empirical material of social research, the texts (construed broadly to include audiovisual, visual, numerical, and alphabetic inscriptions), constitute only one dimension of the analytical problem. Flows of meaning and flows of 'readers'  – and today we might want to add 'writers' – cross-hatch the flow of texts in textual environments. And textual here was already understood as referring to specific material practices that vary widely: the textuality of a printed house design magazine means it is likely to be read differently to the now-declining but still vastly popular SMS mobile phone messages.  Given the complexity of textual environments, we should be less surprised by variation or change, Couldry suggests, than we are by the existence of order: 'in the vast textual fields we inhabit, it is order rather than uncertainty that we need to explain' (87). 
How does digital sociology address vast order? On what scale do we look for order if, as Tsing suggests (and any phenomenology of vision would agree), seeing is already implicitly scaling? One of the problems with the re-scaling of practice is that this scaling is animated by a pursuit of order, and totality. As mentioned above, Github itself encourages a focus on individuals and individual repositories. It affords little scope for examination of transverse flows or the textual fields that Couldry adumbrates. Even the all-important APIs, the interfaces that GitHub offers to developers, focus on providing data about individual repositories and individual users. we encounter a repository that invites software developers and programmers to store, work on and retrieve the source code and associated texts associated with software on many scales, ranging from individuals to large organisations. The writing of the operational texts of code, and to a certain extent, how they are read, is legible in Github repositories woven in subtle ways through code (for instance, in comments, in organisation of the repository, in the references to other software projects, etc). This public legibility is typical of contemporary feedback culture: things are made to be readable by many. Github.com itself produces and encourages the production of various forms of visualisation and tabulation of what goes on there. The fact that we can access an archive of the Github event timeline attests to this. GibHub ran a data competition in 2012 in which data analysts sought to do something with the timeline data (Briandoll, 2012).  But what is most available from that data is a set of pre-formed event types (as we saw in Figure 1) that more or less reinforce Github's conception of itself as first of all a hub and secondly as social media. We can easily for instance examine the most important or famous repository on Github – the Linux kernel, a much-vaunted, and now commercially and technically vital open source software project. Relatively quickly, individual contributions could be analysed, and we could begin to characterise the composition of the group of people who keep this important software object working and up-to-date. And indeed, this work is largely already done by Github.com itself (as the screenshot in Figure 2. shows).



It would even be possible through careful reconstruction to graph the changes in the network of relations that comprise the Linux kernel development teams, and perhaps to see how patterns of work on Linux kernel have changed over time as its economic and technical significance has extended through the popularity of the Android phones that rely on Linux and through the many corporate and industry users/producers invested in Linux. Issues, conversations, team and organisational changes could all be mapped. We could look further at the thousands of 'forks' and 'mirrors' of Linux to be found on Github, and characterise in fine-grained ways how processes of imitation generate flows of readers/writers, how meanings and practices are stabilised through repetition, and how invention might occur at intersections or overlaps between fields. 
If even a single large repository on Github might require gargantuan effort to assimilate and analyse how it unfolds in cultural-economic-technical space, what hope do digital social researchers have in analysing even a platform such as Github? One response might be to say that we should be look for order in scale. That is, the forms of order digital sociology needs to analyse include the persistent or isometric scale rather than the uncertainties of scale (allometric scaling). Github has millions of members, more than ten million repositories (according to its own reports), and is barely coherent because of the explosive growth in hardware platforms, media forms and ways of writing code found there.  Yet great commonalities of practice occur on different scales. For instance, a particular code construct to retrieve a web page and extract its text content might be imitated or reinvented in thousands of different projects. The same kinds of software are re-implemented or imitated across many different projects, often with only small variations.  Viewed from another another angle, those commonalities of practice point to astounding differences: the same code constructs might be found in projects focusing on an ecommerce platform, ecological models of rainforest species diversity, Mozilla Foundation's Firefox browser, the Linux kernel, a library to manipulate financial data, or a modified version of the Android operating system for smart phones.  In short, in many of the settings it encounters, digital social research finds little coherence. It finds almost fractally dimensioned patterns of social action and transaction, linked by the common practices, formats and materials (code patterns, repository mechanisms), but varying widely in time and space, from ephemeral repositories that an individual creates and abandons, to large organisations coordinating projects of long duration. 
In much social research,  problems of scale  largely related to scarcity. Where data was abundant, scale problems were handled by setting limits on data through sampling strategies, research methods and research designs that allowed social researchers to be more or less confident that their research covers the social field of interest (for instance, making sure that differences in age, gender, ethnicity, sexuality, nationality, education-level, or income are represented in the data; many of the chapters in a typical introductory statistics textbook for social science address these problems of scarcity and represetativeness). Selecting and sampling strategies seem to work differently in digital sociology as it encounters expanding textual environments where data scarcity is rarely an issue. The much discussed problem is how to cope with the vast amount of material. What's worse, textual environments such as social media are explicitly expansive. Their expansion is a material component of their mode of existence and they offer many different affordances for expansion.  For instance, every Github repository has prominent web-buttons 'clone this' or 'forkme'  that allow visitors or viewers of the repository to either copy the repository or make a new version of it under their own name. (By contrast, older-style code repositories such as SourceForge.com only allowed people to download copies of the code or software.)  While the textual environment for online code repositories such as Github includes the many forms of text and graphic visible on Github webpages, it also includes the flows of data that these platforms generate for use by others. As millions of people interact even with mid-level platforms such as Github, their actions generate large volumes of data that can be streamed as time-stamped events. So, like many other social media platforms, Github publishes all of these individual time-stamped events  to anyone who wants to use them. (While some users may pay to have their repositories and working practices remain invisible, very many do not.) The events are available more or less as they happen (through the Github API – application programmer interface) or in bulk through various archives (http://githubarchive.org; a mirror of the data is also published by Google as a demonstration of their 'BigQuery' cloud computing service). The data derived from people what do on social media is mixed in form. It includes when things were done (date-time), various free textual forms (descriptions, tags, titles, etc), structured text (links or URLs of associated webpages; names of associated organisations and groups; names of user), categorical attributes (on Github these are limited: the event type, and the programming languages used),  and often a mathematically encoded summary of the result of actions that change the contents of the repository (in the case of Github, the hash digest of any new content or change to existing contents of the repository). 
Although it might seem a purely technical or practical issue, the problem of actually traversing such data flows lies at the heart of digital sociology as well as many parts of contemporary culture. The constant updating of events, the relatively frequent advent of new flows of data, the teeming and burgeoning ways of inhabiting the reefs of digital infrastructures, many of which are developed and available on Github itself,  confront digital sociology with challenges and alluring possibilities. Unlike the major social media platforms or even the legion of startup companies in London, New York, San Francisco, Shanghai, Berlin or Amsterdam who offer ways of packaging, summarising, monitoring or shaping flows of data in networks, digital sociologists do not have hundreds of developers to wrangle data, dozens of computers and disk-drive arrayed in racks to expedite the process of searching or exploring the data.  Given the billions of events welling-up in diverse APIs, what can digital sociology do? Should it sample and filter according to the criteria of adequacy and representativeness? 
The expansive forms of textual environment we have just been describing are writ large at the moment under the broad banner of 'big data.'  The proliferating discussions of 'big data' need to be analysed in their own right in terms of how they intensify desires to connect information flows, previously disparate infrastructures and systems (energy, telecommunications, entertainment, transport, retail and manufacturing), and how they actually  reorganise work, domestic lives, forms of sociality and value in the name of flows of data. 'Big data' is certainly part of the feedback loop or accumulation strategy in which social practices recorded as data become the basis of new textualities that seek to enrol further readers or writers, to align reading, viewing and buying, writing and working, as well as other forms of value. The physical, life and environmental sciences offer both a lead and something distracting here. The term 'data' carries with it an aura of scientificity, objectivity or neutrality that digital sociology is still wrestling with.  'Big data' is an expansive grouping and its memebership continues to grow: house prices, clicks on hyperlinks, vehicle detection loops on roads, mobile phone call details, satellite photos of crops, electronic payment, stellar images from orbiting telescopes, transactional data such as credit card authorisation or supermarket checkout scanners – these are just examples in a list that keeps growing. The listing of data sources is a interminable feature of most talk about big data (and digital sociology shares this habit).  Scientific data, however, has a particular resonance and perhaps anchors some forms of referentiality in data talk. The standard reference to allude to transformations in scientific data is The Fourth Paradigm: Data-intensive Scientific Discovery  (Hey et al., 2009), a book published by Microsoft Research Press (a publisher that probably lies quite close to the source of much business data practice). This book furnishes vignettes of a range of scientific enterprises ranging across physical, earth, environmental and life sciences in which flows of data have transformed knowledge-making practices. The data intensive sciences authorise data practices in specific ways. The auratic power of scientific instruments such as DNA sequences or infrared satellite photos differ, as Mike Savage observes,  from the 'mundane descriptions, … ordinary transactions, websites, Tesco loyalty cards, CCTV cameras in your local shopping centre, etc., that are the stuff of the new social' (Savage, 2009: 171). It may be that this auratic/mundane difference, important though it is in differentiating certain practices, also usefully links different domains of the social. Auratic scientific instrument data, with its referential links to the diversity of life, the fate of the planet or the conundrums of missing matter in the universe,  rivets data to things. The scientific examples allow data more generally in all its administrative, transactional or media-derived forms to carry universalising epistemic  value. It suggests that the birth of stars in remote galaxies can be analysed in similar terms to the birth of stars in the media environments of Xfactor or reality TV shows. In this respect, the popularity of the term 'data science' suggests that the referential power of science matters to business, commerce, industry and government as they seek to commodify, extract or regulate contemporary cultural spaces.  
At the same time, important differences are at work. For instance, people's interactions with Github.com mostly appear in the API data stream as time-stamped events. These events are categorised according to 14 different event types (PushEvent, CommitEvent, AddUserEvent, DeleteEvent. These event types are organic to Github.com, but as variables in any data analysis they are defined by the platform designers rather than by any questions that social researchers might bring to bear on what people do on Github. 'Source-defined variables' are a central concomitant of data analysis practice in digital sociology. We might say that in the new social fields, data has an 'organic' aura: it is generated and collected by virtue of the existence of the infrastructures and platforms that are part and parcel of the social field rather than from instruments or measuring devices introduced by market or social researchers. But even this relationship is becoming increasingly complicated by virtue of the intricate and shifting relations between 'organic data' and 'paid for data' (Google Inc., 2009)).  Even if this data is 'observational' rather than experimental, the fact that is generated intrinsically as part of a social field has powerful referential attractions, and attracts much work. The scaling up of the information infrastructures needed to deal with it is a constant feature of the software projects on Github.com. Many of them deal with problems of scale (for instance, over 1500 repositories relate to 'MapReduce,' a parallel-processing algorithm first developed at Google to improve web search engine response times: https://github.com/search?q=map+reduce; 3700 repositories engage with Hadoop, a single open source implementation of the MapReduce algorithm: https://github.com/search?q=hadoop;). This scalin produces auratic effects that relate to the infrastructures themselves. The infrastructures that increasingly bring people into various forms of relationality are difficult to concretely imagine. We see somewhat sublime images of earth-spanning information networks or visualizations of networks of hundreds of millions of Facebook users, but it is the data flows they produce, even if they are largely inaccessible or discarded by all but the most data-hungry government intelligence agencies, that promise to tell us most about how ideas and values move and differentiate, sometimes coherently and often incoherently.   This too is something that digital sociology might address: the organic-infrastructural aura associated with large-scale data flows. Why does Google make available via their 'BigQuery' service a massive public archive of all the data produced by Github since early 2012? While we, as social researchers, might find it is enormously useful to have an aggregated, hourly-updated timeline of all Github actions, it is very unlikely that some part of Google concerned with data architectures for cloud computing has social researchers particularly in mind. Much more likely, they seek to attract the attention of the millions of software developers who use Github.com for coding work. Trying to see themselves and others in this high volume datastream, software developers and programmers familiarise themselves with Google's BigQuery architecture, and perhaps use it more thereafter. This is certainly our experience as social researchers working on Github.com. The Google BigQuery datasets empowers a different scale of exploration, at a certain cost of being drawn in to large scale tabulations of results and away from the singularity and variability of practices.
### Deriving patterns in digital sociology
An interest in patterns lie at the heart of digital sociology as it is currently taking shape. A crucial question here is how to think about pattern.  As we have seen, in sociological thought more generally, pattern is a long-standing concern. John Law speaks of 'recurring patterns,' Nick Couldry of 'patterns of flow,' and Andrew Abbott suggests that 'if most things that could happen don’t happen, then we are far better  off trying first to find local patterns in data and only then looking for regularities among those patterns' (Abbott, 2001: 241). A broader philosophical re-conceptualisation of patterns runs through some social and cultural theory (for instance, in recent work influenced by A.N. Whitehead, who writes 'beyond all questions of quantity, there lie questions of pattern' (Whitehead, 1956: 195).  Patterns and the learning of patterns are the central pre-occupation in many contemporary sciences, in financial markets, in biomedicine, and business analytics (see for instance, the fields of 'pattern recognition' and 'machine learning' (Hastie et al., 2009)).  
In many cases, people craft these patterns in visualizations. Much digital sociology seeks to either make or reuse visual patterns of cultural processes. The principal visible forms of pattern include plots that show lines, curves, peaks and clusters of points, networks, trees, and maps. Drawing on  the spectrum of plots, graphs and diagrams developed in the last few centuries (see http://www.datavis.ca/milestones/ for a catalogue; Edward Tufte's work  (Tufte, 2001) is a standard reference for quantitative digital data), contemporary visual displays of pattern abound in 'predictive analytics and the move back to visualization in social statistics, the new cartography and associated Web 2.0 innovations, [and] visual montages designed to represent amalgams of “variables”' (Burrows, 2012: 585). Sociological research visual culture of data visualization is surprisingly scarce. The renewed emphasis on visualization in digital sociology differs somewhat from adjacent efforts such as computational social science (Giles, 2012; Housley et al., 2013) where visualization is usually closely coupled to statistical or predictive models. In digital sociology, visual forms and the practices of viewing visual forms are taken seriously as both an object of inquiry and as a challenge to methodological practices precisely because the visual forms attest to a shift away from some traditional sociological concerns with abstractions, models and structures as deep explanations of social processes, and a lighter, perhaps more responsive attunement to patterns, groupings and flows. This contrast has been extensively debated in sociology. (See Andrew Abbot's discussion of patterns versus causes; the 'empirical crisis in sociology' literature; as well as the explicit focus on digital devices in recent sociology (Abbott, 2001; Ruppert, 2013; Savage and Burrows, 2007)) and we will not rehearse these debates in great detail here. They have been debated fairly widely elsewhere (see (Burrows, 2012) for an overview). The central point is that patterns have begun to supplant causes as modes of explanation in many predictive settings.  Although patterns still usually need to be interpreted in some way, the main mode of interpretation is not in terms of causal models.  
These patterns can take the form of plots (bar graphs, scatter plots, lines and curves drawn through clouds of data points, network diagrams), maps on many different scales (especially maps that superimpose different geo-located datasets), information visualizations (typically combining data graphics, text and typographic design elements), as well as tables and textual-graphic forms (word clouds), with varying degrees of animation and with many different forms of scale. These descriptive visualizations might prompt some causal interpretation in their viewers but they are not premised on any such abstraction. While models of various kinds may have been involved in producing them (for instance, many smoothing algorithms used to draw lines through points effectively fit a series of local linear models – splines – in building a smooth curve), the models themselves are not interpreted as such by act in the world more like things than thoughts. A related point is that techniques of description that rely on pattern matching and pattern recognition have implicitly become mundane parts of contemporary culture in many different ways (for instance, in the face recognition logic now built into many digital cameras, or the much-discussed recommendation systems typical of online commerce). And they are in any case widely distributed through various social fields where visual displays, metrics, dashboards, graphs, and visualizations form part and parcel of social life, whether in the 'dashboard' that users of the microblogging site Tumblr see, the graphic displays that users of supply chain and inventory management systems or financial traders gaze at (Knorr Cetina and Bruegger, 2004), or in the many news-related and particular sport-oriented visualizations produced by data journalists for news sites such as The Guardian datablog (Guardian News, 2009) or the New York Times' highly visible news visualizations (New York Times, 2012). Some commentators suggest that the production and use of such visualizations is a key concern for contemporary sociology: 'the discipline … will have to take visualization methodologies far more seriously than we have hitherto' writes Roger Burrows (Burrows, 2012: 585) because of the ways that they are being used and could be used to understand 'particular patterns of association that exist between persons, objects, symbols, technologies and so on' (585). 
Sociological work on the transformations of data visualisation is still rather scarce. Although network visualisations, tag clouds, stream graphs and the like have abounded in data visualisation on the web, especially with the growth of graphics libraries and packages such as Hadley Wickhams ggplot2 (Wickham, 2009), Mike Bostock's d3.js,  IBM's older ManyEyes or  widely-used scientific plotting packages such as matplotlib  and Matlab, and many others, we have little sense yet of the visual culture of these devices and their visual forms. Sociological work on scientific visualization offers some leads here (Latour et al., 1990; Myers, 2008) alongside work on visualization in finance (Pryke, 2010),  but the visual culture of data as it moves out of scientific publication has received little attention. There is much scope for investigation of the seeing in data visualisation if, as Gillian Rose writes,  'different ways of seeing are bound up into different, more-or-less conscious, more-or-less elaborate, more-or-less consistent practices' (Rose, 2012: 549).  Practices of data visualisation are routinized through the proliferation of certain visual forms (the network diagram, bubble plots and chloropleth maps are widely found) in different places. What do they make make visible? Both in the visual culture of data, and in its own visualisation of digital data, digital sociology faces the problem of describing how patterns are produced at the intersection of various concretisations and abstractions. As Mike Savage suggests, we need to understand 'how pattern is derived  and produced in social inscription devices' (Savage, 2009: 171), whether these devices are objects of analysis or part of our own methods. (Again, overlaps between the object of digital sociology and the methods of digital sociology occur at every turn.) 


Patterns arise in very different ways. On the one hand, many data visualisations seek to show something that is hard to see because it occurs on spatio-temporal scales that are difficult to directly see. For instance,  Figure 3 seeks to convey something of the patterns associated with different scales of activity in Github repositories by counting events that appear in the Github timeline over an interval of two years (2012-2013). The general pattern shown here is the somewhat annoyingly ubiquitous 'power law' distribution of events that often shows up in social media data. At the left hand end, the high point refers to the millions of Github repositories consisting of one or two events. At the low end on the right, the curve approaches the x-axis, a small number of repositories receive many thousands of events. The power law distribution of events in social media often vexes data analysis and data visualization. Many social media processes yield heavy-tailed distributions when graphed. This common scaling of events across the 'many-some-rare'scales (Conte et al., 2012: 334) requires site-specific work. The visualization of repository event counts begins to do this by showing something of the different composition of the repositories on the different scales.  The many small repositories mainly consist of the basic content-creating Push events. Mid-scale repositories show the presence of more social events such as Watch and Fork. The rarer very large repositories attract many more social events – Fork, Watch and PullRequest. 
But if this pattern of scaling between many-some-rare is so common ('In recent years, due to ubiquitous computerization, networking and obsessive data collection, reports of heavy-tailed distributions have almost become a routine' (Muchnik et al., 2013: 1)), what can digital sociology do? On the one hand, many data visualisations whether in the form of networks, scatter plots or line graphs today present the power-law or scale-free pattern of digital media. What then of the cultural saturated feedback loop described above? As technological concretisation binds practices, habits, emotions, and interactions through digital devices and infrastructures and devices, the derivation of patterns increasingly depends on abstractive modes of knowing that classify, cluster, calculate and predict events precisely in order to shape them. Predictive analytics, as demonstrated in Google Research's work on how users' searches foreshadow airline ticket bookings  or car sales (Varian and Choi, 2009), derives patterns from data using a much more technical armature of machine learning techniques. This modelling is an increasingly dense force affecting the feedback loop between people and digital infrastructures (Pariser, 2011). Techniques such k-means clustering, nearest neighbour classification, linear regression, logistic regression, principal component analysis,  neural networks, decision trees, random forests, and support vector machines are rapidly becoming an integral part of every level and niche of digital assemblages, ranging from playful mundane devices such as 'kittydar, 'a neural network to detect cat photos (https://github.com/harthur/kittydar) through to thousands of projects implementing 'face detectors' or 'motion detectors' for smart phones, web browsers, and for different operatings systems. Even a single technique like the popular random forest classifier (Breiman, 2001) can be found hundreds of thousands of times in gitbhub.com and tens of thousands of times in a popular programming languages such as R (R Development Core Team, 2010). The proliferation of these techniques is perhaps much less visible, and the ways in which they imprint or weave through flows of meaning and things  is harder to analyse. They are somewhat withdrawn elements in the feedback loops of cultural space. These predictive models and classifiers sometimes operationally shape the experience and action (as in Netflix or Amazon recommendation systems, or in the classifiers that detect and classify body gestures in the Microsoft Kinect game controller), and sometimes they are analytic tools used by people working on platforms trying to make sense of emerging or divergent patterns in practice. As always, the feedback loops between knowing and acting are hard to disentangle precisely because they are becoming more tightly coupled. If decision trees were an analytic techniques developed by statisticians in the late 1970s trying to make sense of air pollution measurements in Los Angeles (Breiman et al., 1984), in the Kinect game controller they become predictive devices that intensify the immediacy of computer game play. Online learning – the constant updating of predictive models in response to the flow of current events – is increasingly common in social network media and online transactions. 
Patterns, then, are made, acted upon, altered and re-imprinted in much more rapid cycles. In such cases, pattern recognition is no longer a practice conducted at leisure by expert interpreters or analysts. They are operational components of the textual environment. The transformation of abstract analytic devices of many different kinds (linear regression models, clustering algorithms, Bayesian models, etc.) into things that either circulate much more widely in the world in gadgets and devices or into meta-things such as search engines that modulate flows on a large scale is a central component of the flow of texts, meanings, audiences, viewers, visitors, spectators, readers and players in many settings.  These abstractions do exercise an auratic effect akin to the data infrastructures we were discussing above. Journalists, social researchers and commentators on digital technology tend to attribute great potency to algorithms in general. The proliferation of algorithms is hard to deny, but digital sociology might play an important role in describing  what happens as these algorithms shift shape and move into different settings ranging from pay day loans to computer game play, from web search engines or ecommerce recommendations to face recognition in digital cameras. The aura of algorithms as epistemic prime movers akin to steam power or electricity covers over their diverse provenance (they do not come just from computer science but also from statistics, psychology, cognitive science, ecology, archaeology or geology) and their diversity in practice. Perhaps more significantly the patterns that these algorithms produce or derive from data are neither obviously legible in descriptive devices, nor is their relation to existing structures, groupings, or classifications direct. 
For digital sociology, recognising the effects of this pattern-making is a significant challenge. The imprinting of flows of meaning, media and practices is sometimes legible (for instance, in the 'induced viralities'  seen in various social media platforms that identify trends using pattern recognition and then feed them back into the flow of messages or network connections), but not always. Another difficulty is much more challenging.  While descriptive devices can relatively easily slip into the analytical toolkit  of social researchers – the spread of tag-clouds or Wordle graphics would be a typical instance of this  – the appropriation and re-purposing of machine learning, pattern recognition or data mining approaches is more problematic. Many of these devices rely on formidable mathematical apparatus, ranging across linear algebra, probability theory, function analysis and numerical optimisation. The diverse provenance of the techniques means that, although they operate abstractly (that is, with little regard for the concrete specificities of a given situation), they handle notions of group, classification, difference and similarity heterogeneously.  Nearly all of them bring to bear powerful scaling processes that reduce the high dimensions and volume of data to legible forms of variation and pattern.  Again, scale and pattern are intimately interwoven here. 
### Conclusion 
Organised attempts to analyse and study social patterns have animated the growth of large-scale digital infrastructures and social media. The algorithmic elements of search engines such as Google Web Search's PageRank  algorithm  or Facebook's  Social Graph suggest that the detection of social patterns and flows of meanings, texts and readers has been a pivotal device in the growth of digital culture. Where does this leave digital sociology? Several years ago, one of the editors of the current volume wrote:
It follows that a core concern [for social research] might be to scrutinize how pattern is derived  and produced in social inscription devices, as a means of considering the robustness of such derivations, what may be left out or made invisible from them, and  so forth. We need to develop an account which seeks to criticize notions of the descriptive insofar as this involves the simple generation of categories and groups, and instead focus on the fluid and intensive generation of potential (Savage, 2009: 171).
Patterns in cultural life today derive from social inscription devices assembled in wide-ranging feedback loops. Feedback runs between recording what people do, visualising or graphing what they do, finding/generating patterns in the recording, and shaping what they encounter next. If digital sociology attempts to describe what is happening in contemporary textual and media environments, it needs to map the paths of these feedback loops running across publics, infrastructures, techniques, textual and media forms, and diverse, expanding practices. At the same time, pattern themselves are increasingly heavily analysed and modelled  inside the culturally saturated feedback loop between people and social inscription devices. Digital social research is not alone in its interest in this processes. Reputational, attentional and sentiment economies (Arvidsson, 2011) directly act on that patterning. 
We suggest identifying  events that link this patterning and scaling is a key concern for digital sociology. The 'massive, culturally-saturated feedback loop' produces massive feedback-saturated cultural loops. As the case of Github shows, the process of implementing social inscription devices is itself a highly social field filled with its own patterns and problems of scale. The 'simple generation of categories and groups' that Savage refers to can certainly be found there, replicating and propagating at scale. Furthermore, digital sociology and certainly social research more generally is not immune from the aura of 'big data.' It is always grappling with the reflexive-recursive problem of its own implication in methods, techniques and infrastructures for deriving pattern. We can easily, as digital social researchers, find ourselves lost in  the labyrinth of technical possibilities opening up around platforms, tools, visual forms and data flows.  In this labyrinth, we have been suggesting, the entanglements of pattern and scale present the primary objects and means of analysis of saturated feedback loops typical digital cultures. These entanglements between scale and pattern, and especially between the different ways in which pattern might be found could offer a way to avoid the homogeneity and uniformity of predictive analytics with their highly constrained commitment to increasing advertising revenue or sales. 

### References
Abbott A (2001) Time matters: on theory and method. University of Chicago press.
Adkins L and Lury C (2009) Introduction: What Is the Empirical? European Journal of Social Theory, 12(1), 5–20.
Arvidsson A (2011) General Sentiment: how value and affect converge in the information economy. The Sociological Review, 59, 39–59.
Back L and Puwar N (2012) Live Methods. Wiley-Blackwell,  Available from: http://library.wur.nl/WebQuery/clc/2016616 (accessed 28 November 2013).
boyd  danah and Crawford K (2012) Critical Questions for Big Data. Information, Communication & Society, 15(5), 662–679.
Breiman L (2001) Random forests. Machine learning, 45(1), 5–32.
Breiman L, Friedman J, Olshen R, et al. (1984) CART: Classification and regression trees. Wadsworth: Belmont, CA, 156.
Briandoll (2012) Data at Github. GitHub,  Available from: https://github.com/blog/1112-data-at-github (accessed 3 March 2014).
Burrows R (2012) Digitalization, Visualization and the ‘Descriptive Turn’. In: Heywood I, Sandywell B, Gardiner M, et al. (eds), The handbook of visual culture, London: Berg, pp. 572–588.
Conte R, Gilbert N, Bonelli G, et al. (2012) Manifesto of computational social science. European Physical Journal-Special Topics, 214(1), 325–346.
Couldry N (2000) Inside culture : reimagining the method of cultural studies. London: SAGE.
Cukier KN and Mayer-Schoenberger (2013) The Rise of Big Data. How It’s Changing the Way We Think About the World. Foreign Affairs,  Available from: http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/139104/kenneth-neil-cukier-and-viktor-mayer-schoenberger/the-rise-of-big-data (accessed 10 February 2014).
Galloway AR (2014) The Cybernetic Hypothesis. differences, 25(1), 107–131.
Giles J (2012) Computational social science: Making the links. Nature, 488(7412), 448–450.
Google Inc. (2009) Back to Basics: Direct, referral or organic - definitions straight from the source - Analytics Blog. Google Analytics Blog,  Available from: http://analytics.blogspot.co.uk/2009/08/back-to-basics-direct-referral-or.html (accessed 7 February 2014).
Guardian News (2009) Data journalism and data visualization from the Datablog | News | The Guardian.  Available from: http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog (accessed 30 January 2014).
Hastie T, Tibshirani R and Friedman JH (2009) The elements of statistical learning: data mining, inference, and prediction. New York: Springer.
Hey T, Tansley S and Tolle K (2009) The fourth paradigm: data-intensive scientific discovery. Microsoft Research.
Housley W, Williams Matthew, Williams Malcolm, et al. (2013) Computational Social Science: Research Strategies, Design and Methods Introduction. International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 16(3), 173–175.
Knorr Cetina KK and Bruegger U (2004) Traders’ engagement with markets: a postsocial relationship. The Blackwell cultural economy reader, 121–142.
Latour B, Lynch M and Woolgar S (1990) Drawing things together. In: Anonymous (ed.), Representation in Scientific Practice, Cambridge, MA London: MIT Press, pp. 20–68.
Latour B, Jensen P, Venturini T, et al. (2012) The Whole is Always Smaller than its Parts. How Digital Navigation May Modify Social Theory. British Journal of Sociology, 63(4), 590–615.
Law J (1994) Organizing modernity. Oxford, UK ; Cambridge, Mass., USA: Blackwell.
Lee B and LiPuma E (2002) Cultures of Circulation: The Imaginations of Modernity. Public Culture, 14(1), 191–213.
Lupton D (2012) Digital Sociology: An Introduction.  Available from: http://prijipati.library.usyd.edu.au/handle/2123/8621 (accessed 14 November 2013).
Manovich L (2011) ’Trending: The Promises and the Challenges of Big Social Data.’. Debates in the Digital Humanities,  Available from: http://www.manovich.net/DOCS/Manovich_trending_paper.pdf (accessed 12 March 2013).
Marres N (2012) The redistribution of methods: on intervention in digital social research, broadly conceived. The Sociological Review, 60(S1), 139–165.
Meyer R (2013) Github, Object of Nerd Love, Makes Play for Non-Programmers. The Atlantic,  Available from: http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2013/08/github-object-of-nerd-love-makes-play-for-non-programmers/278971/ (accessed 13 February 2014).
Muchnik L, Pei S, Parra LC, et al. (2013) Origins of power-law degree distribution in the heterogeneity of human activity in social networks. Scientific Reports, 3,  Available from: http://www.nature.com.ezproxy.lancs.ac.uk/srep/2013/130507/srep01783/full/srep01783.html (accessed 1 March 2014).
Myers N (2008) Molecular embodiments and the body-work of modeling in protein crystallography. Social Studies of Science, 38(2), 163–199.
New York Times (2012) 2012: The Year in Graphics.  Available from: http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2012/12/30/multimedia/2012-the-year-in-graphics.html (accessed 30 January 2014).
Pariser E (2011) The filter bubble: What the Internet is hiding from you. Penguin UK,  Available from: http://books.google.co.uk/books?hl=en&lr=&id=-FWO0puw3nYC&oi=fnd&pg=PT3&dq=eli+pariser&ots=g2PoCtpQV-&sig=3_CftKt2BPOwLVpT_OFzizJr_-c (accessed 13 February 2014).
Pentland A (2014) Social Physics: How Good Ideas Spread—The Lessons from a New Science. New York: Penguin Press HC, The.
Prediction Impact Inc. (2009) Predictive Analytics World Conference: Agenda.  Available from: http://www.predictiveanalyticsworld.com/sanfrancisco/2009/agenda.php#usergroup (accessed 24 May 2011).
Pryke M (2010) Money’s eyes: the visual preparation of financial markets. Economy and Society, 39(4), 427–459.
R Development Core Team (2010) The R Project for Statistical Computing.  Available from: http://www.r-project.org/ (accessed 11 June 2010).
Rogers R (2013) Digital methods. Cambridge, Massachusetts; London: The MIT Press.
Rose G (2012) The Question of Method: Practice, Reflexivity and Critique in Visual Culture Studies. In: Heywood I, Sandywell B, Gardiner M, et al. (eds), The handbook of visual culture, London: Berg, pp. 542–558.
Ruppert E (2013) Rethinking empirical social sciences. Dialogues in Human Geography, 3(3), 268–273.
Savage M (2009) Contemporary Sociology and the Challenge of Descriptive Assemblage. European Journal of Social Theory, 12(1), 155–174.
Savage M and Burrows R (2007) The Coming Crisis of Empirical Sociology. Sociology, 41(5), 885–899.
Schutt R and O’Neil C (2013) Doing data science. Sebastopol, Calif.: O’Reilly & Associates Inc.
Thrift N (2006) Re-inventing invention: new tendencies in capitalist commodification. Economy and Society, 35(2), 279–306.
Tsing AL (2005) Friction : an ethnography of global connection. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Tufte E (2001) The visual display of quantitative informations 2nd ed. Cheshire, Conn.: Graphics Press.
Uprichard E (2012) Being stuck in (live) time: the sticky sociological imagination. Sociological Review, 60, 124–138.
Varian H and Choi H (2009) Official Google Research Blog: Predicting the Present with Google Trends.  Available from: http://googleresearch.blogspot.com/2009/04/predicting-present-with-google-trends.html (accessed 23 May 2011).
Whitehead AN (1956) Modes of thought; six lectures delivered in Wellesley College, Massachusetts, and two lectures in the University of Chicago. New York,: Cambridge University Press.
Wickham H (2009) ggplot2: elegant graphics for data analysis. Springer New York,  Available from: http://had.co.nz/ggplot2/book.

