 1	# Intersectional assemblages and analytic affiliations: altered states in code ethnographies
   
 2	The chapter concerns an attempt to bring an ethnographic sensibility to the data generated by contemporary software developers.
 3	Since launching in late 2007, the code repository Github (Github.com) has become tremendously popular amongst programmers.
 4	Github in early  2016 claims to host 29 million code repositories and 6 million coders.
 5	Ethnographers first studied coders working  on high profile software projects such as Linux in terms of ethics [@Coleman_2005], law [@Lessig_2004], publics [@Kelty_2008] and experiences of freedom [@Coleman_2009].
 6	Github's growth attests to some substantial transformations in the way coders, coding and code associate with each other.
 7	On Github, coding practices have been re-formatted in ways that emulate the traits and tendencies of contemporary social media platforms.
 8	'Sharing,' 'liking,' 'watching' and re-circulation abound.
 9	The willingness of coders to affiliate with Github is difficult to characterise.
10	Not only does Github host a wide variety of commercial, industry, government, scientific, educational and civil society software (and non-software) projects, highly dispersed and diverse human and non-human actors congregate there.
11	Github itself thereby generates much data, indeed big data, about the 'social' practices of coding.
12	What is the mode of association [@Kelty_2005] then for coders becoming social?
13	Amongst many other other changes, coders render accounts of what coders do through analysis of big data generated by other coders.
14	Rather than recursive publics as the mode of association, we see recursive analytics of association.
15	The growth of Github as intersectional assemblage,  the re-shaping of coding practices in imitation of social media, and the  susceptibility of large-scale public data about coding  to analysis by coders alter the scope and focus of ethnographic study.
16	Ethnographic sensibilities, joined with the right to tinker with the affiliative data, suggest that writing code and writing on Github might also form part of an analytic-ethnographic sensibility. 
   
