
# Abstract

This paper reports on an  attempt to re-count a single large number, in this case, the approximately 29 million code repositories on the social media platform Github. Science studies and related fields have a decades-long interest in numbers and counting, in the power-politics of numbering  and the diversity of numbering and calculative practices in science, business, health and government. Debates have recently centred on the inherent instability of enumeration in practice, the reactivity of numbers in media assemblages, the being of number, the productive falseness of numbers  or the configuration of market calculations. This attention to the specificity of numbers stands against a background of sociological debates about challenges to empirical methods posed by increasingly abundant digital enumerations. How amidst these accounts of number could STS itself work with numbers differently? Does STS have any calculative agency  amidst its field settings, documents and data sets? The paper proposes a configurative treatment of large numbers in two respects.  It  analyses the sense-making processes that practically invest in and supplement those numbers with measurements, calculations, diagrams, figures and statements relating to belonging, association, accumulation and growth. It also re-counts large numbers by paying attention to the acts of imitation, copying, cloning and duplication characteristic of digital practices, and the complex, device-specific   configurations that give rise to them. 
