Platforms are at the centre of debates around value, property, work, identity and subjectivity in digital culture. What are platforms?  Nick Srnicek's _Platform Capitalism_ for instance, defines platforms as 'digital infrastructures that enable two or more groups to interact' [@Srnicek_2016, 25]. Srnicek proceeds to categorise platforms according to a taxonomy of their objects (advertising, transport/logistics, social networks, etc.)  Economists such as Andrew McAfee and Erik Brynjolfsson understand platforms as 'a digital environment characterized by near zero marginal cost of access, reproduction and distribution' [@McAfee_2017, 137]. Their account in _Machine, Platform, Crowd_ is strongly oriented to the economically disruptive development of platforms.    Neither Srnicek or McAfee focus on the making of platforms. They view them from the perspective of business models, assets and ownership rather than in terms of an ongoing process of development and organization. The ongoing making of platforms, or the _platformizing_ practices, do not figure much (or even at all) in these  accounts, even as they stress the centrality of platforms to 'our digital future' [@McAfee_2017]. 

Platformizing refers to the process of making platforms by placing people and things in specific kinds of relations. Given that platform capitalization renders relations in terms of future revenue streams, platformizing configures people and things, especially code-configured things, as revenue-generating assets. If much recent literature on platforms tends to treat platforms as fully accomplished or completely built, the idea of platformizing shifts the emphasis to their ongoing genesis. 

Configuration, as Lucy Suchman suggests [@Suchman_2012], concerns both the technical arrangements and significance of platforms.  A configuration refers first of all the composition and joining of technical elements in platforms. Comprised of largely generic commodity hardware and widely circulated software elements, the ensemble reality or specific texture and composition of platforms inheres in its configuration. Configurations range from technical details such as the specific key shortcuts a software developer sets up in their code editor to the broad architecture of  data-flows between  database,  web-server, and mobile messaging system in a high-volume social media platform. Configuration also refers, much less overtly but directly, to the narration of the significance of platforms.   When, for instance, Facebook software engineers describe the [TBC]        The senses of configuration -- composition and narration -- play out together, at least for some of the actors concerned. If we interested in both the composition and significance of platforms, then configurative analysis, with its entwining of technical practice and narratives of significance might be valuable.   

